Today, May 7, the US Environmental Protection Agency officially announced the launch of ENERGY STAR® NextGen™ Certified Homes and Apartments, a voluntary, leading-edge certification program for the nation’s residential new construction sector. Developed with funding from President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act, ENERGY STAR NextGen will increase national energy and emissions savings by accelerating the building industry’s adoption of advanced, energy-efficient technologies.
“President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act is addressing climate challenges head-on and accelerating the adoption of clean, affordable technologies,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “By collaborating with developers and home builders nationwide, ENERGY STAR NextGen is set to act as a catalyst for the construction of new, energy-efficient homes and apartment buildings. Strategic partnerships like this are not just cutting costs for American families and greenhouse gas emissions — they’re paving the way for a clean energy future for current and future generations.”

Building on the 30-year legacy of the EPA’s ENERGY STAR program, the ENERGY STAR NextGen certification will recognize homes and apartments with increased energy efficiency; reduced on-site emissions through heat pumps, heat pump water heaters, electric cooking appliances; and residential electric vehicle charging. Compared to typical code-level construction, homes earning the ENERGY STAR NextGen certification will be 20% more efficient and help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 40%–80%.

Across the country, several early adopters have already begun to build to the ENERGY STAR NextGen specification:

Beazer Homes (Maryland)
GreenSmith Builders (Minnesota)
New Tradition Homes (Washington)
Quantum Equities, LLC (Washington)
Thrive Home Builders (Colorado)
Additionally, several utilities have announced early incentives for builders to adopt the specification:
EmPOWER Maryland, including Baltimore Gas and Electric (BGE), Potomac Electric Power Company (Pepco), and Potomac Edison (PE) (Maryland)
Snohomish County Public Utility District No. 1 (Washington)
Utah Clean Energy (Utah)
Xcel Energy (Minnesota)
Xcel Energy (Colorado)
Energy used in commercial and residential buildings accounts for one-third of US greenhouse gas emissions. An EPA study last fall estimated that these same buildings have the potential to cut their emissions by up to 63% by 2030 and up to 70% by 2035. By encouraging efficient, electric technologies, the new ENERGY STAR NextGen certification can play an important role in achieving this goal.
Learn more about the ENERGY STAR NextGen certification.
About ENERGY STAR
ENERGY STAR is the government-backed symbol for energy efficiency, providing simple, credible, and unbiased information that consumers and businesses rely on to make well-informed decisions. Thousands of industrial, commercial, utility, state, and local organizations rely on their partnership with EPA to deliver cost-saving energy efficiency solutions. Since 1992, ENERGY STAR and its partners helped American families and businesses avoid more than $500 billion in energy costs and achieve more than 4 billion metric tons of greenhouse gas reductions. Nearly 2.5 million energy-efficient new homes and apartments have earned ENERGY STAR certification to date, and about 10% of all US homes built in America earned the ENERGY STAR label last year.

Today, May 6, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced that more than 200 Tribes, plus American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, and the US Virgin Islands, have published climate action plans with financial support made possible by President Biden’s Investing in America agenda. The planning process is supported by EPA’s Climate Pollution Reduction Grants program, which offers a unique opportunity for Tribal and territorial governments to develop strategies to reduce harmful pollution and address environmental justice concerns, while building the infrastructure, industry, and competitive economy for a clean energy future. EPA received 81 plans in total from Tribes and Tribal consortia representing more than 200 Tribes, along with four plans from territories.

“Climate change is an issue that affects Tribes disproportionately,” said Kenneth Martin, Director of EPA’s American Indian Environmental Office. “An unprecedented number of Tribes and intertribal partnerships worked with EPA to create Priority Climate Action Plans to remediate climate pollution in their communities. Thanks to President Biden’s Investing in America agenda, this is the first time that climate planning on this scale has been accomplished across Tribes. The measures proposed in these plans reflect an incredible opportunity to fight the climate crisis and benefit this and future generations.”

The Climate Pollution Reduction Grants program created under the Inflation Reduction Act — the largest climate investment in US history — is enabling community-driven solutions to the climate crisis and helping accelerate America’s clean energy transition. The program is covered under President Biden’s Justice40 Initiative, which set the goal that 40% of the overall benefits of certain federal climate, clean energy, and other investments flow to disadvantaged communities that are marginalized by underinvestment and overburdened by pollution. 

In 2023, under the first phase of the $5 billion program, EPA provided $250 million in grants to 45 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, 82 metropolitan statistical areas, four territories, and more than 200 Tribes (including Tribal consortia) to develop ambitious climate action plans that address greenhouse gas emissions across their communities and economies.

As a key deliverable of the initial $250 million planning phase of the program, EPA provided grantees with resources to develop and submit Priority Climate Action Plans focused on high-priority, implementation-ready activities to reduce GHG emissions. Plans developed by Tribes and territories were due on April 1, and plans developed by states and large metropolitan areas were due on March 1.

Each grantee has the opportunity of aligning its PCAP with its own priorities and interests, while also prioritizing measures that benefit low-income and disadvantaged communities. For many Tribes and territories, PCAPs are their first climate action plans. For others, the PCAPs build on existing climate and energy planning work undertaken over many years.

In addition to addressing climate pollution, these grants can also support efforts to:

Ensure Tribes and territories are included in climate discussions at all levels of government, are part of the process to identify community-driven solutions, and benefit from their implementation.
Improve public health through the simultaneous reduction of criteria and toxic air pollutants.
Help businesses capitalize on new economic opportunities, spur financial growth and create jobs by supporting new industries and developing training programs to prepare workers. 
PCAPs submitted to EPA lay the groundwork for the second phase of the CPRG program: $4.6 billion in competitive implementation grants, available specifically to planning grant recipients and other eligible entities, to fund GHG reduction measures contained within the PCAPs. In addition to the $4.3 billion general competition, Tribes and territories were eligible to apply for a $300 million Tribe and territory competition. PCAPs also help prepare Tribes and territories to access a broader set of funding opportunities, including other programs under President Biden’s Investing in America agenda. The deadline for the CPRG Implementation Grants Tribes and Territories Competition was May 1.

Over the coming months, all planning grant recipients will develop Comprehensive Climate Action Plans, which will include a broader suite of GHG reduction measures from all primary emitting sectors – electric power, transportation, commercial, and residential buildings, industry, agriculture/natural and working lands, and waste and materials management. The comprehensive plans will contain GHG emissions projections and reduction targets, air quality and health benefits information, and workforce planning assessments. EPA is committed to providing grant recipients with technical support, tools, and other resources throughout these planning processes.

Together, the CPRG planning grants and competitive implementation funding will support the deployment of technologies to reduce GHG emissions and other harmful pollution across the country, facilitate the transition to a low-carbon economy, promote Tribal sovereignty, and advance environmental justice by prioritizing public health and environmental benefits to overburdened communities. 

Today, April 22, as the Biden-Harris Administration celebrates Earth Day, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced 60 selectees that will receive $7 billion in grant awards through the Solar for All grant competition to deliver residential solar projects to over 900,000 households nationwide. The grant competition is funded by President Biden’s Investing in America agenda through the Inflation Reduction Act, which created EPA’s $27 billion Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund. The 60 selections under the $7 billion Solar for All program will provide funds to states, territories, Tribal governments, municipalities, and nonprofits across the country to develop long-lasting solar programs that enable low-income and disadvantaged communities to deploy and benefit from distributed residential solar, lowering energy costs for families, creating good-quality jobs in communities that have been left behind, advancing environmental justice and tackling climate change.

“Today we’re delivering on President Biden’s promise that no community is left behind by investing $7 billion in solar energy projects for over 900,000 households in low-income and disadvantaged communities,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “The selectees will advance solar energy initiatives across the country, creating hundreds of thousands of good-paying jobs, saving $8 billion in energy costs for families, delivering cleaner air, and combating climate change.”

“Solar is the cheapest form of electricity—and one of the best ways to lower energy costs for American families,” said John Podesta, Senior Advisor to the President for International Climate Policy. “Today’s announcement of EPA’s Solar for All awards will mean that low-income communities, and not just well-off communities, will feel the cost-saving benefits of solar thanks to this investment.”

“Residential solar electricity leads to reduced monthly utility bills, reduced levels of air pollution in neighborhoods, and ultimately healthier communities, but too often low-income and disadvantaged communities have been left out. Today’s announcement will invest billions to ensure that affordable housing across the US can access solar and increase energy efficiency and climate resilience,” said US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Acting Secretary Adrianne Todman. “HUD is honored to have played a key role in today’s monumental announcement, which will provide meaningful household savings to households in low-income and disadvantaged communities, reduce both greenhouse gas emissions and energy costs, and deliver electricity during grid outages for low-income households.”

“Sunlight is powering millions of homes across the nation, and we're working hard to ensure Americans everywhere can benefit from this affordable clean energy resource,” said US Secretary of Energy Jennifer M. Granholm. “DOE is proud to work alongside our partners at EPA and across the Federal government to help communities access the limitless energy of the sun to light their homes and power their businesses.”

“The United States can and must lead the world in transforming our energy systems away from fossil fuels,” said US Senator Bernie Sanders (VT). “The Solar for All program – legislation that I successfully introduced – will not only combat the existential threat of climate change by making solar energy available to working class families, it will also substantially lower the electric bills of Americans and create thousands of good-paying jobs. This is a win for the environment, a win for consumers, and a win for the economy.”

EPA estimates that the 60 Solar for All recipients will enable over 900,000 households in low-income and disadvantaged communities to deploy and benefit from distributed solar energy. This $7 billion investment will generate over $350 million in annual savings on electric bills for overburdened households. The program will reduce 30 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions cumulatively, from over four gigawatts of solar energy capacity unlocked for low-income communities over five years. Solar and distributed energy resources help improve electric grid reliability and climate resilience, which is especially important in disadvantaged communities that have long been underserved.

Solar for All will deliver on the Biden-Harris Administration’s commitment to creating high-quality jobs with the free and fair choice to join a union for workers across the United States. This $7 billion investment in clean energy will generate an estimated 200,000 jobs across the country. All selected applicants intend to invest in local, clean energy workforce development programs to expand equitable pathways into family-sustaining jobs for the communities they are designed to serve. At least 35% of selected applicants have already engaged local or national unions, demonstrating how these programs will contribute to the foundation of a clean energy economy built on strong labor standards and inclusive economic opportunity for all American communities.

The Solar for All program also advances President Biden’s Justice40 Initiative, which set the goal that 40% of the overall benefits of certain federal climate, clean energy, affordable and sustainable housing, and other investments flow to disadvantaged communities that are marginalized by underinvestment and overburdened by pollution. All of the funds awarded through the Solar for All program will be invested in low-income and disadvantaged communities. The program will also help meet the President’s goal of achieving a carbon pollution-free power sector by 2035 and net-zero emissions economy by no later than 2050.

Solar for All will expand existing low-income solar programs and launch new ones. The 60 selected applicants will serve households in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and territories, as well as increase access to solar for Tribes. EPA has selected 49 state-level awards totaling approximately $5.5 billion, six awards to serve Tribes totaling over $500 million, and five multistate awards totaling approximately $1 billion. Solar for All will deploy residential solar for households nationwide by not only providing grants and low-cost financing to overcome financial barriers to deployment but also by providing services to communities to overcome other barriers such as siting, permitting, and interconnection. A complete list of the selected applicants can be found on EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund Solar for All website.

The 60 selected applicants have committed to delivering on the three objectives of the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund: reducing climate and air pollution; delivering benefits to low-income and disadvantaged communities; and mobilizing financing to spur additional deployment of affordable solar energy. Solar for All selected applicants are expanding existing low-income solar programs and launching new programs. In at least 25 states and territories nationwide, Solar for All is launching new programs where there has never been a substantial low-income solar program before. In these geographies, Solar for All selected applicants will open new markets for distributed solar by funding new programs that provide grants and low-cost financing for low-income, residential solar.

To date, many of the 60 selected Solar for All applicants have supported low-income and underserved communities in installing innovative residential solar projects. With this new funding, selectees can launch thousands more projects like these throughout every state and territory in the nation:

The threat of storms is a major reason Athens, Georgia resident Delmira Jennings and her husband John used selected applicant Capital Good Fund's Georgia BRIGHT leasing program to install a 13-kilowatt solar and 10-kilowatt-hour battery system in February. “Last year, we spent two days without power after what seemed like a mini tornado,” Jennings said. After a recent outage, Jennings noted that she didn't even know she lost power. “The batteries kicked in and all the power items we were using were on battery backup.”
Last year, the Northern Cheyenne Tribe, whose successful pilot initiative served as the basis for selected applicant Mandan, Hidatsa, Arikara (MHA) Nation’s Northern Plains Tribal Solar for All program, took major steps toward a clean energy future with the completion of the first phase of the White River Community Solar project. This project will deploy 15 solar systems at the homes of elders while piloting a groundbreaking approach to solar ownership and management that is intended to set an example for Tribes across the nation.
Through its existing Solar on Multifamily Affordable Housing (SOMAH) program — a model for equitably providing solar to low-income renters in disadvantaged communities — selected applicant GRID Alternatives’ team in San Diego installed a solar energy system at Trolley Trestle, home to youth transitioning out of the foster care system. Energy cost savings estimated at over $600k over ten years, will be reinvested to provide additional services to those who call Trolley Trestle home, including more job and life skills training.
Review and Selection Process Information

The 60 applicants selected for funding were chosen through a competition review process. This multi-stage process included review from hundreds of experts in climate, power markets, environmental justice, labor, and consumer protection from EPA, Department of Energy, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Department of Treasury, Department of Agriculture, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of Labor, Department of Defense, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and the Department of Energy’s National Labs – all screened through ethics and conflict of interest checks and trained on the program requirements and evaluation criteria. Applications were scored and selected through dozens of review panels and an interagency senior review team.

EPA anticipates that awards to the selected applicants will be finalized in the summer of 2024, and selected applicants will begin funding projects through existing programs and begin expansive community outreach programs to launch new programs in the fall and winter of this year. Selections are contingent on the resolution of all administrative disputes related to the competitions.
Today, April 11, the US Environmental Protection Agency released its latest annual Inventory of US Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks (GHG Inventory), which presents a national-level overview of annual greenhouse gas emissions from 1990 to 2022. Net US greenhouse gas emissions were 5,489 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent in 2022, a 1.3% increase in emissions from 2021. The increase is largely due to higher energy use in 2022, reflecting the continued rebound in economic activity following the height of the coronavirus pandemic. However, emissions have declined 17% overall since 2005, which reflects the combined impacts of several factors, including energy market trends, technological changes including energy efficiency improvements, and the carbon intensity of energy fuel choices.

“Through a rigorous development and review process, EPA annually refines and strengthens our greenhouse gas inventory, producing a comprehensive tally of US greenhouse gas emissions and sinks,” said Joseph Goffman, Assistant Administrator for the Office of Air and Radiation. “Reflecting input from hundreds of experts across the government, academia, industry, and consulting, the GHG Inventory report is a model for high-quality and transparent national GHG accounting.”

For this latest release, EPA has made several important improvements, including updates to estimates for oil and gas and incorporation of long-term research into methods for estimating emissions and sinks from forested land.

The GHG Inventory covers seven key greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, sulfur hexafluoride, and nitrogen trifluoride. In addition to tracking US greenhouse gas emissions, the Inventory also calculates carbon dioxide that is removed from the atmosphere through the uptake of carbon in forests and other vegetation.

This impartial, policy neutral report has been compiled annually since 1993 and submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and also the Paris Agreement. The report is prepared by EPA in collaboration with numerous experts from other federal agencies, state government authorities, research and academic institutions, and industry associations. National inventories for developed countries should be provided to the UNFCCC each year by April 15.
Today, April 4, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced its selections for $20 billion in grant awards under two competitions within the historic $27 billion Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund (GGRF), which was created under the Inflation Reduction Act as part of President Biden’s Investing in America agenda. The three selections under the $14 billion National Clean Investment Fund and five selections under the $6 billion Clean Communities Investment Accelerator will create a national clean financing network for clean energy and climate solutions across sectors, ensuring communities have access to the capital they need to participate in and benefit from a cleaner, more sustainable economy. By financing tens of thousands of projects, this national clean financing network will mobilize private capital to reduce climate and air pollution while also reducing energy costs, improving public health, and creating good-paying clean energy jobs in communities across the country, especially in low-income and disadvantaged communities.

Vice President Kamala Harris and EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan will announce the selections under these two grant competitions in Charlotte, North Carolina. While in Charlotte, the Vice President and Administrator will meet with a homeowner in a historically Black community, where a local nonprofit, Self-Help, worked with community partners to finance, renovate, and construct energy-efficient, affordable homes for low- and moderate-income families. Thanks to that partnership, this first-time homeowner pays significantly lower energy bills and has a healthy and comfortable place to raise his family. The selections the Vice President is announcing will ensure more families can experience those same benefits. In fact, one of the selections being announced today will allow Self-Help and its partners as part of the Climate United Fund’s application to deliver similar home efficiency projects to over 30,000 homes across the country.

Collectively, the selected applicants have committed to driving significant impact toward the program’s objectives. They will reduce or avoid up to 40 million metric tons of climate pollution per year, making a significant contribution to the Biden-Harris Administration’s climate goals. They will mobilize almost $7 of private capital for every $1 of federal funds, ensuring that each public dollar is leveraged for significant private-sector investment. And they will dedicate over $14 billion of capital—over 70% of the selections for awards announced today—toward low-income and disadvantaged communities, making the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund the single largest non-tax investment within the Inflation Reduction Act to build a clean energy economy while benefiting communities historically left behind.

To date, the eight selected applicants have supported thousands of individuals, businesses, and community organizations to access capital for climate and clean energy projects. With their awards, selectees will unleash tens of thousands of more projects like these across the country for decades to come:

When her water heater died, Mildred Carter in DeSoto, Georgia could not immediately afford to replace it. With the support of Power Forward Communities coalition member Rewiring America, Mildred was enrolled in a whole-town demonstration program that would combine Georgia Power incentives of up to $5,000 with philanthropic support for energy efficiency upgrades in her home. Her brand-new heat pump water heater was installed on December 23, just in time for the holidays.
The National Trust Community Investment Corporation, Appalachian Community Capital’s partner, recently led the charge on a $5.7 million sustainable rehabilitation of the historic National Guard Armory building located in one of Owosso, Michigan’s underserved communities. Alongside the Shiawassee Chamber of Commerce, the organization helped transform the space into an incubator for Owosso’s small businesses and local nonprofits complete with high-efficiency, all-electric heating and ENERGY STAR certified appliances.
Opportunity Finance Network member Solar and Energy Loan Fund (SELF) operates in Florida, which has experienced some of the most disastrous effects of the climate crisis. SELF, a US-Treasury certified Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI), recently partnered with Miami-Dade County’s Office of Resilience to invest in solar power, window and roof upgrades, and aging-in-place upgrades—including the installation of solar panels and battery backup systems for Gibson Plaza, a 65-unit affordable senior housing project. These investments have helped the community reduce energy costs while also building resiliency, ensuring residents can stay in their homes and remain protected against future climate impacts.
“When President Biden and I made the largest investment in our nation's history to address the climate crisis and to build a clean energy economy, we made sure that every community would be able to participate and benefit,” said Vice President Kamala Harris. “The grantees announced today will help ensure that families, small businesses, and community leaders have access to the capital they need to make climate and clean energy projects a reality in their neighborhoods.”

“President Biden and Vice President Harris have put communities at the center of their Investing in America agenda. Today, we’re putting an unprecedented $20 billion to work in communities that for too long have been shut out of resources to lower costs and benefit from clean technology solutions,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “The selectees announced today will deliver transformational investments for American communities, businesses, and families and unleash tens of thousands of clean technology projects like putting solar on small businesses, electrifying affordable housing, providing EV loans for young families, and countless others. That translates to good-paying jobs, energy bill savings, and cleaner air, all while delivering on President Biden’s historic agenda to combat climate change.”

"So many families face the same challenges: something breaks, you can’t afford to replace it, and the short-term solution is really no solution at all,” said homeowner Mildred Carter of DeSoto, Georgia. “I’m grateful for the help I got to install a brand-new heat pump water heater that provides me all the hot water I need while saving energy and money. And I’m grateful that there’s now going to be more options for families that will make these new appliances affordable and bring the benefits to them too."

Together, the eight selected applicants have committed to delivering on the three objectives of the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund: reducing climate and air pollution; delivering benefits to communities, especially low-income and disadvantaged communities; and mobilizing financing and private capital. As part of this collective effort, selected applicants have committed to:

Fund projects that will reduce or avoid greenhouse gas emissions by up to 40 million metric tons of CO2 equivalent per year—equivalent to the emissions of nearly 9 million typical passenger vehicles—making a significant contribution to the President’s climate goals of reducing emissions 50 to 52 percent below 2005 levels in 2030 and achieving net-zero emissions by no later than 2050.
Dedicate over $14 billion toward low-income and disadvantaged communities, including over $4 billion for rural communities as well as almost $1.5 billion for Tribal communities—ensuring that program benefits flow to the communities most in need and advance the President’s Justice40 Initiative.
Achieve a private capital mobilization ratio of nearly 7 times, with every dollar in grant funds leveraged for almost seven dollars in private funds over the next seven years—turning $20 billion of public funds into $150 billion of public and private investment to maximize the impact of public funds.
These commitments have been taken or derived from the application packages that selected applicants submitted to EPA and adjusted for the amount of funding received. Moving forward, EPA will work with selected applicants to revise their application packages into workplans that reflect formal commitments through the award agreements. Read what the eight selected applicants have committed to deliver on in their application packages.

“After more than a decade of hard work, our vision to create a national climate bank is a reality. Thanks to the $20 billion we secured in the Inflation Reduction Act, the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund will draw on the experience of public, semi-public, and non-profit community leaders to unleash tens of billions of dollars to deliver more than money, but also justice, to disadvantaged communities. As the single largest climate investment in the Inflation Reduction Act, the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund will cut emissions, protect health, and create job and economic opportunities so that communities won’t just survive but thrive for generations to come. Even more than money, the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund is delivering hope – hope for justice and for a livable future.  I applaud the Environmental Protection Agency’s work to quickly stand up this critical program while ensuring transparency and collaboration,” said US Senator Edward J. Markey, Chair, Senate EPW Subcommittee on Clean Air, Climate, and Nuclear Safety, and co-author of the National Climate Bank Act.

“Fifteen years ago, we laid out our vision for a national climate bank that would bolster our efforts to combat global warming by accelerating investment in clean energy. We turned that vision into reality by establishing the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund through the Inflation Reduction Act – and today’s deployment of $20 billion from that Fund is a pivotal moment in America’s fight to confront the climate crisis while driving inclusive economic growth. These funds will serve as a catalyst for private investment in job-creating projects to cut carbon emissions, spur clean energy innovation, and advance environmental justice in underserved communities that have borne the brunt of climate change. Today’s investments are just the beginning – they will be multiplied seven times over to turbocharge our transition to a clean energy economy,” said US Senator Chris Van Hollen, who first introduced legislation to create a national green bank in 2009 when he was a member of the US House of Representatives.

“These awards are making clean energy financing accessible to low-income and underserved communities that have for far too long carried the brunt of environmental pollution, helping us attack the climate crisis head on and creating jobs while lowering energy costs. These investments will fund projects that otherwise would not have been possible, and will mobilize nearly seven times as much in private capital. I’m proud to have helped author and pass the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund and look forward to continuing to invest in the most impactful and urgent projects to reach our climate and environmental justice goals,” said Congresswoman Debbie Dingell (MI-06).

Selected Applicant Information

The eight selected applicants across the National Clean Investment Fund and Clean Communities Investment Accelerator will create a first-of-its- national clean financing network that will finance climate and clean energy projects, especially in low-income and disadvantaged communities.

National Clean Investment Fund (NCIF) Selectees

Under the $14 billion National Clean Investment Fund, the three selected applicants will establish national clean financing institutions that deliver accessible, affordable financing for clean technology projects nationwide, partnering with private-sector investors, developers, community organizations, and others to deploy projects, mobilize private capital at scale, and enable millions of Americans to benefit from the program through energy bill savings, cleaner air, job creation, and more. Additional details on each of the three selected applicants, including the narrative proposals that were submitted to EPA as part of the application process, can be found on EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund NCIF website.

All three selected applicants surpassed the program requirement of dedicating a minimum of 40% of capital to low-income and disadvantaged communities. The three selected applicants are:

Climate United Fund ($6.97 billion award), a nonprofit formed by Calvert Impact to partner with two US Treasury-certified Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), Self-Help Ventures Fund and Community Preservation Corporation. Together, these three nonprofit financial institutions bring a decades-long track record of successfully raising and deploying $30 billion in capital with a focus on low-income and disadvantaged communities. Climate United Fund’s program will focus on investing in harder-to-reach market segments like consumers, small businesses, small farms, community facilities, and schools—with at least 60% of its investments in low-income and disadvantaged communities, 20% in rural communities, and 10% in Tribal communities.
Coalition for Green Capital ($5 billion award), a nonprofit with almost 15 years of experience helping establish and work with dozens of state, local, and nonprofit green banks that have already catalyzed $20 billion into qualified projects—and that have a pipeline of $30 billion of demand for green bank capital that could be coupled with more than twice that in private investment. The Coalition for Green Capital’s program will have particular emphasis on public-private investing and will leverage the existing and growing national network of green banks as a key distribution channel for investment—with at least 50% of investments in low-income and disadvantaged communities.
Power Forward Communities ($2 billion award), a nonprofit coalition formed by five of the country’s most trusted housing, climate, and community investment groups that is dedicated to decarbonizing and transforming American housing to save homeowners and renters money, reinvest in communities, and tackle the climate crisis. The coalition members—Enterprise Community Partners, LISC (Local Initiatives Support Corporation), Rewiring America, Habitat for Humanity, and United Way—will draw on their decades of experience, which includes deploying over $100 billion in community-based initiatives and investments, to build and lead a national financing program providing customized and affordable solutions for single-family and multi-family housing owners and developers—with at least 75% of investments in low-income and disadvantaged communities.
Clean Communities Investment Accelerator (CCIA) Selectees

Under the $6 billion Clean Communities Investment Accelerator, the five selected applicants will establish hubs that provide funding and technical assistance to community lenders working in low-income and disadvantaged communities, providing an immediate pathway to deploy projects in those communities while also building capacity of hundreds of community lenders to finance projects for years. Each of the selectees will provide capitalization funding (typically up to $10 million per community lender), technical assistance subawards (typically up to $1 million per community lender), and technical assistance services so that community lenders can provide financial assistance to deploy distributed energy, net-zero buildings, and zero-emissions transportation projects where they are needed most. 100% of capital under the CCIA is dedicated to low-income and disadvantaged communities. Additional details on each of the five selected applicants, including the narrative proposals that were submitted to EPA as part of the application process, can be found on EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund CCIA website.

The five selected applicants are:

Opportunity Finance Network ($2.29 billion award), a ~40-year-old nonprofit CDFI Intermediary that provides capital and capacity building for a national network of 400+ community lenders—predominantly US Treasury-certified CDFI Loan Funds—which collectively hold $42 billion in assets and serve all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and several US territories.
Inclusiv ($1.87 billion award), a ~50-year-old nonprofit CDFI Intermediary that provides capital and capacity building for a national network of 900+ mission-driven, regulated credit unions—which include CDFIs and financial cooperativas in Puerto Rico—that collectively manage $330 billion in assets and serve 23 million individuals across the country.
Justice Climate Fund ($940 million award), a purpose-built nonprofit supported by an existing ecosystem of coalition members, a national network of more than 1,200 community lenders, and ImpactAssets—an experienced nonprofit with $3 billion under management—to provide responsible, clean energy-focused capital and capacity building to community lenders across the country.
Appalachian Community Capital ($500 million award), a nonprofit CDFI with a decade of experience working with community lenders in Appalachian communities, which is launching the Green Bank for Rural America to deliver clean capital and capacity building assistance to hundreds of community lenders working in coal, energy, underserved rural, and Tribal communities across the United States.
Native CDFI Network ($400 million award), a nonprofit that serves as national voice and advocate for the 60+ US Treasury-certified Native CDFIs, which have a presence in 27 states across rural reservation communities as well as urban communities and have a mission to address capital access challenges in Native communities.
Review and Selection Process Information

The eight applicants were selected through a robust process to review and select applications for each of the two competitions. The multi-staged review and selection process included dozens of federal employees—all screened through ethics and conflict of interest checks as well as trained on the program requirements and evaluation criteria—participating in the review and scoring of the selected applications through expert review panels; interviews with senior officials; and recommendations from an expert, interagency senior review team. Additional details on the review and selection process can be found on EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund NCIF and CCIA selection process website.

EPA anticipates that awards to the selected applicants will be finalized by July 2024 and that projects will be funded by the selected applicants and their partners shortly thereafter. Note that all of the selections are contingent on the resolution of all administrative disputes related to the competitions. Review frequently asked questions about the selection announcement, including the awards process.

Informational Webinars

EPA will host informational webinars as part of the program’s commitment to public transparency. EPA has scheduled webinars for each of the two programs, with additional webinars to be announced on EPA’s GGRF webpage. The details for the scheduled webinars are included below. The webinars will be recorded and posted on EPA’s GGRF webpage.

National Clean Investment Fund webinar: Wednesday, April 10, 2024, 1:00pm – 1:30pm ET. Join the April 10 meeting
Clean Communities Investment Accelerator webinar: Thursday, April 11, 2024, 1:00pm – 1:30pm ET. Join the April 11 meeting
Additional information can be found on EPA’s GGRF webpage.

Here’s what they are saying about the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund:

“We are honored to be one of the awardees under the National Clean Investment Fund and are grateful to the congressional champions, the Biden-Harris Administration, and the EPA for bringing this historic program to life," said Beth Bafford, CEO, Climate United. "The Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund presents a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to tackle the climate crisis while building a stronger economy for all Americans. An equitable energy transition is the challenge of our time, and we’re ready to get to work.”

“The EPA’s awards of $20 billion from the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund jumpstart the next step in American green banking," said Coalition for Green Capital Chief Executive Officer, Reed Hundt. "In 2009 Congressmen Chris Van Hollen of Maryland and Ed Markey of Massachusetts obtained bipartisan support for capitalizing a public investing institution to partner with private investors in expediting the construction of the clean power platform that must be the foundation of American dynamism in this century. They battled for this legislation in every Congress since that date. As Senators, they and Congresswoman Debbie Dingell of Michigan successfully included this idea in the Inflation Reduction Act. The Coalition for Green Capital is now honored to be one of the recipients of that public capital. Investing in projects from our $30 billion pipeline and working with all community lenders, we and other award winners will prove that public-private investment delivers cheap, clean power fast to low-income and disadvantaged communities, and indeed everywhere in our great country.”

“The Inflation Reduction Act provided the single largest investment in climate solutions in US history, including much-needed capital to improve American homes and serve low-income and disadvantaged communities,” said Tim Mayopoulos, CEO of Power Forward Communities and former CEO of Fannie Mae, the nation’s leading source of housing finance. “This initial funding can unlock billions of dollars of additional private capital to make the housing sector a key contributor to meeting our climate goals—and make the climate imperative a new driver of affordable and healthy housing solutions.”

“OFN is thrilled to partner with the EPA to finance the clean energy transition and drive opportunity in communities across the country by supporting mission-driven community lenders through the GGRF,” said Opportunity Finance Network President and CEO Harold Pettigrew. “As the nation’s leading investment intermediary and network of community lenders serving rural, urban, and Native low-income and disadvantaged communities, we are clear that now is the time to act on climate change and community development finance is an integral part of the solution. OFN, our network, and the CDFI industry are made for this moment, and we look forward to working with partners to deliver impact.”

“Inclusiv is honored to be selected for the EPA’s Clean Communities Investment Accelerator (CCIA)," said Cathie Mahon, President and CEO, Inclusiv. "The award offers the opportunity to build more equitable environmental, energy and financial systems in this country. We are thrilled that CCIA will enable us to direct grants and assistance to a network of high-impact, community-owned and governed credit unions and cooperativas with deep roots in low-income and disadvantaged communities. Our approach scales lending that will decarbonize communities and enable consumers, households and businesses to benefit from greater energy efficiency, resilience and financial security.”

“Our community lenders are the boots on the ground serving hard-working American families and communities too often excluded from the innovation economy that defines our country. We advance green lending, capacity and capital in low-income and disadvantaged communities, allowing the most impacted to lead change for all of us,” said Douglass Sims, Justice Climate Fund Interim Chief Executive Officer. “JCF thanks the Biden Administration and the EPA for recognizing JCF’s transformational role in advancing the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund’s mission. We are honored to have been selected for the Clean Communities Investment Accelerator program.”

“The Green Bank for Rural America is a place-based effort that will be a hub for investment and technical assistance to community lenders, local leaders, and workforce development partners across the United States,” said Donna Gambrell, Appalachian Community Capital’s President and CEO. “We are grateful to EPA for this recognition. We want to ensure that no communities are left behind and that low-income and disadvantaged communities in Appalachia and other parts of this country benefit from efforts that will result in healthy communities for generations to come.”

"With profound gratitude, I am honored that the Native CDFI Network has been selected to receive the historic CCIA award as part of the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund, marking a significant milestone in our collective efforts to combat climate change and promote environmental justice to our Native communities. The vast majority of Native CDFIs and other experienced lenders serving Native communities came together as one to seize this landmark opportunity to transform the health and resilience of the places our people call home,” said Pete Upton, Native CDFI Network CEO. “The CCIA and other EPA Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund programs provide a level of funding for clean energy projects in low-income and disadvantaged communities that we are unlikely to see again in our lifetimes. The Native CDFI Network has spent months methodically developing a thoughtful and comprehensive national plan to maximize the environmental, social, economic, and cultural benefits of Indian Country’s fair share of CCIA funding. Our coalition stands ready to deliver on that plan."

“EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund will democratize financing for clean energy and climate solutions in every pocket of the country while lowering energy costs for families and creating good-paying jobs,” said John Podesta, Senior Advisor to the President for International Climate Policy. “Today’s announcement delivers the benefits of climate and clean energy investments to communities that have historically borne the brunt of pollution.”

“Today’s announcement is a game changer. I’m pleased to see that a significant portion of these funds will invest in housing that is energy-efficient and climate resilient,” said US Department of Housing and Urban Development Acting Secretary Adrianne Todman. “HUD is very thankful for our very close partnership with EPA over the past year to ensure that the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund includes these essential investments.”

“President Biden’s Investing in America agenda has equity as its North Star, centering on communities too often left out of the conversation. Now, through the historic Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund, communities across the country can take full control of their clean energy future leveraging federal and private funding for tried and true solutions that will strengthen their energy resilience, slash costs for their residents and revitalize their local economies,” said US Energy Secretary Jennifer M. Granholm.

“The investments Democrats made are paying off for the American people.” said Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer. “By providing $20 billion that will flow to tens of thousands of green and climate friendly projects across the country, today’s historic announcement, made possible by our Inflation Reduction Act, is ushering in the clean energy revolution. I am especially proud that EPA has secured commitments from today’s awardees that over 70 percent of the capital – over $14 billion – will go to low-income and disadvantaged communities. These investments mean cleaner communities, lower energy costs, and jobs, jobs, jobs. I’m proud of this bold investment in communities across America and New York and confident today’s announcement will have positive reverberations for generations to come.”

“Working with President Biden, House Democrats passed the Inflation Reduction Act to strike a dramatic blow against the climate crisis, set our planet on a sustainable trajectory forward and stand up a clean energy economy. It was the largest federal climate investment in the history of the nation. I thank President Biden, Vice President Harris and EPA Administrator Regan for this historic $20 billion investment to help advance clean technology across America,” said House Democratic Leader Hakeem Jeffries.

“Every American should benefit from the investments we make to fight climate change, no matter their zip code,” said US Senator Carper, Chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee. “That’s why we created the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund in the Inflation Reduction Act — to ensure that these unprecedented climate and clean energy investments would especially benefit often overlooked communities, those with the greatest need. I am thrilled to see the Biden Administration swiftly implementing this critical program, which will help to lower energy costs for everyone and create good-paying jobs across the nation. Congratulations to each of the eight recipients who will bring us one step closer to a clean energy future.”

“Today’s announcement is historic. The Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund is a first-of-its-kind program that will save Americans money on their utility bills, create hundreds of thousands of new good-paying jobs, and protect our communities from the worst impacts of catastrophic climate change. This is what investing in the American people looks like and it is an absolute game-changer for our fight against the climate crisis,” said Congressman Frank Pallone, Jr., Ranking Member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. “I applaud the Biden Administration for working diligently to ensure that the program’s funds will reach those who need them most, and I look forward to the unprecedented climate progress it will help us achieve in the years ahead.”

Additional Background

The President’s Inflation Reduction Act authorized the EPA to create and implement the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund, a historic $27 billion investment to combat the climate crisis by mobilizing financing and private capital for greenhouse gas- and air pollution-reducing projects in communities across the country. Together, the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund’s National Clean Investment Fund, Clean Communities Investment Accelerator, and Solar for All programs will finance clean technology deployment nationally, finance clean technology deployment in low-income and disadvantaged communities while simultaneously building the capacity of community lenders that serve those communities, and spur adoption of clean distributed solar energy that lowers energy bills for millions of Americans in low-income and disadvantaged communities. EPA expects to announce additional information on the $7 billion Solar for All competition later this spring. These programs advance President Biden’s Justice40 Initiative while expanding good-paying job opportunities in domestic industries.
Today, March 20, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced final national pollution standards for passenger cars, light-duty trucks, and medium-duty vehicles for model years 2027 through 2032 and beyond. These standards will avoid more than 7 billion tons of carbon emissions and provide nearly $100 billion of annual net benefits to society, including $13 billion of annual public health benefits due to improved air quality, and $62 billion in reduced annual fuel costs, and maintenance and repair costs for drivers. The final standards deliver on the significant pollution reductions outlined in the proposed rule, while accelerating the adoption of cleaner vehicle technologies. EPA is finalizing this rule as sales of clean vehicles, including plug-in hybrid and fully electric vehicles, hit record highs last year.

EPA projects an increase in US auto manufacturing employment in response to these final standards, consistent with the broader Biden-Harris Administration commitment to create good-paying, union jobs leading the clean vehicle future. Strong standards have historically contributed to the US leading the world in the supply of clean technologies, with corresponding benefits for American global competitiveness and domestic employment. Since President Biden took office, companies have announced more than $160 billion in investment in US clean vehicle manufacturing and the US auto manufacturing sector has added more than 100,000 jobs.

These standards will provide greater certainty for the auto industry, catalyzing private investment, creating good-paying union jobs, and invigorating and strengthening the US auto industry. Over the next decade, the standards, paired with President Biden’s historic Investing in America agenda and investments in US manufacturing, will set the US auto sector on a trajectory for sustained growth. Additionally, the final standards will lower costs for consumers. Once fully phased in, the standards will save the average American driver an estimated $6,000 in reduced fuel and maintenance over the life of a vehicle.

EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan will join President Biden’s National Climate Advisor Ali Zaidi today at an event in Washington, DC to announce the final standards and how they build on President Biden’s historic climate and economic record. The event will be livestreamed starting at noon EDT.

“With transportation as the largest source of US climate emissions, these strongest-ever pollution standards for cars solidify America’s leadership in building a clean transportation future and creating good-paying American jobs, all while advancing President Biden’s historic climate agenda,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “The standards will slash over 7 billion tons of climate pollution, improve air quality in overburdened communities, and give drivers more clean vehicle choices while saving them money. Under President Biden’s leadership, this Administration is pairing strong standards with historic investments to revitalize domestic manufacturing, strengthen domestic supply chains and create good-paying jobs.”

“President Biden is investing in America, in our workers, and in the unions that built our middle class and established the US auto sector as a leader in the world,” said President Biden’s National Climate Advisor Ali Zaidi. “The President’s agenda is working. On factory floors across the nation, our autoworkers are making cars and trucks that give American drivers a choice – a way to get from point A to point B without having to fuel up at a gas station. From plug-in hybrids to fuel cells to fully electric, drivers have more choices today. Since 2021, sales of these vehicles have quadrupled and prices continue to come down. This growth means jobs, and it means we are moving faster and faster to take on the climate crisis – all thanks to the President’s leadership.”

Statement from United Automobile Workers: “The EPA has made significant progress on its final greenhouse gas emissions rule for light-duty vehicles. By taking seriously the concerns of workers and communities, the EPA has come a long way to create a more feasible emissions rule that protects workers building ICE vehicles, while providing a path forward for automakers to implement the full range of automotive technologies to reduce emissions.”

Light- and Medium-Duty Vehicle Final Standards

The final standards announced today, the “Multi Pollutant Emissions Standards for Model Years 2027 and Later Light-Duty and Medium-Duty Vehicles,” build on EPA’s existing emissions standards for passenger cars and light trucks for model years 2023 through 2026. The standards continue the technology-neutral and performance-based design of previous EPA standards for cars, pickups, and vans, and leverage advances in clean car technologies to further reduce both climate pollution and smog- and soot-forming emissions. EPA is finalizing the same standard proposed for MY 2032 while allowing additional time for the auto sector to scale up clean vehicle manufacturing supply chains in the first three years covered by the rule.

Annually, the net benefits to society for the light- and medium-duty final rule are estimated to be $99 billion. The final rule is expected to avoid 7.2 billion tons of CO2 emissions through 2055, roughly equal to four times the emissions of the entire transportation sector in 2021. It will also reduce fine particulate matter and ozone, preventing up to 2,500 premature deaths in 2055 as well as reducing heart attacks, respiratory and cardiovascular illnesses, aggravated asthma, and decreased lung function.

EPA received extensive feedback on the proposed rule, including through written comments, testimony at public hearings, and other stakeholder engagements. The final standards were informed by the best available data in the public record and rigorous technical assessments. Like the proposal, EPA’s final rule gives manufacturers the flexibility to efficiently reduce emissions and meet the performance-based standards through the mix of technologies they decide is best for them and their customers. EPA’s analysis considers a broad suite of available emission control technologies, and projects that consumers will continue to have a wide range of vehicle choices under the final rule, including advanced gasoline vehicles, hybrids, plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, and full battery electric vehicles.

Compared to the existing MY 2026 standards, the final MY 2032 standards represent a nearly 50% reduction in projected fleet average GHG emissions levels for light-duty vehicles and 44% reductions for medium-duty vehicles. In addition, the standards are expected to reduce emissions of health-harming fine particulate matter from gasoline-powered vehicles by over 95%. This will improve air quality nationwide and especially for people who live near major roadways and have environmental justice concerns.

Investing in America’s Clean Transportation Future

The final rule reflects the significant investments in clean vehicle technologies that industry is already making domestically and abroad, as well as ongoing US market shifts and increasing consumer interest in clean vehicles. The Biden-Harris Administration is also directly supporting communities across America in moving towards a cleaner transportation future, including by building a national network of EV chargers and alternative-fuel stations; ensuring domestic manufacturers have the critical minerals and materials they need to make EV batteries; and funding clean transit and clean school buses, with priority for underserved communities. President Biden’s Investing in America agenda is focused on growing the American economy from the bottom up and the middle out – from rebuilding our nation’s infrastructure, to creating a manufacturing and innovation boom, to building a clean-energy economy that will combat climate change and make our communities more resilient.

Here's what leaders are saying about the final rule:

“I’ve always said Michigan automakers are the best in the world. And this is their moment,” said Senator Debbie Stabenow (MI). “I appreciate EPA’s commitment to engaging with our automakers and autoworkers to develop an ambitious but achievable final rule. It represents an opportunity for union workers to continue to build the vehicles of the future right here in the US and tackle the climate crisis.”

“My priority will always be to protect American jobs and our environment, keep the United States at the forefront of automotive manufacturing, technology, and innovation, and keep our domestic industry strong and competitive,” said Congresswoman Debbie Dingell (MI-06). “The EPA has worked with all stakeholders to reach this final rule that includes hybrid and electric vehicles, and ensure these goals are achievable. It’s important to protect vehicle choice – the number of available models has doubled in the last three years, and in the last year sticker prices are down 20%. We need to continue to work on making sure that these vehicles are affordable to everyone, that we have the infrastructure in place to make them accessible and practical for consumers, and bring jobs back to the US The bottom line is that the future of the industry must be created in America and driven by American workers, and we are all committed to working together toward that future.”

“The future is electric. Automakers are committed to the EV transition – investing enormous amounts of capital and building cutting edge battery electric vehicles, plug-in hybrids, traditional hybrids and fuel cell vehicles that drive efficiency and convert petroleum miles to electric miles,” said John Bozzella, President and CEO, Alliance for Automotive Innovation. “Consumers have tons of choices. But pace matters. Moderating the pace of EV adoption in 2027, 2028, 2029 and 2030 was the right call because it prioritizes more reasonable electrification targets in the next few (very critical) years of the EV transition. These adjusted EV targets – still a stretch goal – should give the market and supply chains a chance to catch up. It buys some time for more public charging to come online, and the industrial incentives and policies of the Inflation Reduction Act to do their thing. And the big one? The rules are mindful of the importance of choice to drivers and preserves their ability to choose the vehicle that’s right for them.”

“This is a day to celebrate American achievement. The step EPA is taking today will slash climate pollution and air pollution,” said Amanda Leland, Executive Director of Environmental Defense Fund. “It will bring more jobs for workers, more choices and more savings for consumers, and a healthier future for our children. The US has leapt forward in the global race to invest in clean vehicles, with $188 billion and nearly 200,000 jobs on the way. Jobs in communities across the country, in places like Michigan, Nevada, and Kentucky. These clean car standards will help supercharge economic expansion and make America stronger.”

“These standards make clear that securing America’s global leadership in manufacturing and securing a better future are 100% aligned,” said Albert Gore, Executive Director of the Zero Emission Transportation Association. “We have everything we need today to meet and exceed this standard, and that means more of the vehicles sold in America will be made in America.”
The US Environmental Protection Agency will hold several public webinars in February and March on the agency’s final rule that will sharply reduce methane and other harmful air pollutants from the oil and natural gas industry, including from hundreds of thousands of existing sources nationwide, promote the use of cutting-edge methane detection technologies, and deliver significant economic and public health benefits.

Oil and natural gas operations are the nation’s largest industrial source of methane, a climate “super pollutant” that is many times more potent than carbon dioxide and is responsible for approximately one third of the warming from greenhouse gases occurring today. Sharp cuts in methane emissions are among the most critical actions the United States can take in the short term to slow the rate of climate change.

Information about the webinars is below. All webinars are free and open to the public; however, presentations are geared toward specific audiences.

Overview Training Webinars

These webinars will provide overviews of the final rule, with a focus on the audiences listed below. Note: All times are listed in Eastern time. Please adjust for your time zone as needed:

Tuesday, Feb. 27: 2:30-5 p.m. for small businesses and industry.
Wednesday, Feb. 28: 2:30-5 p.m. for Tribal Nations and Tribal environmental professionals.
Thursday, Feb. 29: 6-8:30 p.m. for communities.
Alternative Test Method - Advanced Methane Detection Technology Webinar

This webinar will focus on the options in the final rule for using advanced methane detection technologies, like satellite monitoring, aerial surveys, and continuous monitors, to find leaks or super-emitter events. It will include details on the process for applying to use alternative test methods and what needs to be included in the application. The webinar will be from 1-4 p.m. Tuesday, March 19.
The US Environmental Protection Agency is recognizing eight vehicle dealerships for being the first to earn EPA’s ENERGY STAR certification for superior energy performance. Vehicle dealerships that earn the ENERGY STAR use significantly less energy — and contribute fewer greenhouse gas emissions — than their peers.

“Reducing energy use in commercial buildings is an essential part of the transition to a clean energy economy,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “I congratulate these businesses for demonstrating the power of energy efficiency to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in a cost-effective way at auto dealerships across the country.”

The first vehicle dealerships to earn EPA’s ENERGY STAR certification are:

Acura of Sherman Oaks, Sherman Oaks, California
Brandfon Honda, Branford, Connecticut
Coggin Honda Orlando, Orlando, Florida
DCH Tustin Acura, Tustin, California
Island Honda, Kahului, Hawaii
Marin Acura, Corte Madera, California
Thayer Honda, Bowling Green, Ohio
Ventura Toyota, Ventura, California
To earn the ENERGY STAR, these vehicle dealerships demonstrated that they are more energy efficient than at least 75% of other dealerships across the country. Using EPA’s online ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager tool, they benchmarked their energy efficiency based on 12 months of utility bills. The resulting 1–100 ENERGY STAR score, adjusted for weather and business activity, gives insight into a dealership’s energy performance. A score of 50 indicates median energy performance. A score of 75 indicates performance better than 75% of similar dealerships nationwide, making that dealership eligible for ENERGY STAR certification. To develop the 1–100 ENERGY STAR score for vehicle dealerships, EPA relied on 2019 data from an industry survey conducted by the National Automobile Dealers Association.

Energy use in commercial and residential buildings accounts for one-third of US greenhouse gas emissions. A recent EPA report estimates these same buildings have the potential to cut their emissions by up to 63% by 2030 through a combination of energy efficiency, electrification, and clean energy, enabled by the Inflation Reduction Act.

ENERGY STAR certified buildings use an average of 35% less energy and are responsible for 35% fewer greenhouse gas emissions than typical buildings. To date, nearly 43,000 buildings and plants have earned the ENERGY STAR.

About ENERGY STAR

ENERGY STAR® is the government-backed symbol for energy efficiency, providing simple, credible, and unbiased information that consumers and businesses rely on to make well-informed decisions. Thousands of industrial, commercial, utility, state, and local organizations rely on their partnership with EPA to deliver cost-saving energy efficiency solutions. Since 1992, ENERGY STAR and its partners helped American families and businesses avoid more than $500 billion in energy costs and achieve more than 4 billion metric tons of greenhouse gas reductions.
As part of the US Environmental Protection Agency’s Community, Equity & Resiliency initiative, a groundbreaking effort to help communities across the nation navigate EPA’s Inflation Reduction Act investments and other new funding opportunities made possible by President Biden’s Investing in America agenda, EPA will host the first in a national series of in-person, community-based Regional Roadshow events, starting tomorrow, January 18 in Albany, New York. These events provide community leaders the opportunities to engage with their peers to develop or leverage community-based partnerships to access funding and technical assistance to implement local climate and environmental justice solutions.

WE ACT for Environmental Justice’s Thriving Communities Technical Assistance Center (TCTAC) will support the Albany, New York Roadshow. As a TCTAC, WEACT for Environmental Justice helps environmental justice communities across EPA Region 2 by providing trainings and other assistance to build capacity for navigating federal grant application systems, writing strong grant proposals, and effectively managing grant funding. Community members in Albany will have the opportunity to dream big on local climate action with peers and learn more about the technical assistance available to help turn ideas into realities.

“President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act created the largest investment in climate action and environmental justice in US history,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “Through this next phase of the Community, Equity & Resiliency initiative, we’ll continue meeting communities that have historically been left behind and locked out of climate and clean energy investments where they are, and equip them with resources to access these historic investments in America.”

“We delivered historic funding in the Inflation Reduction Act to help communities make major investments to fight climate change at the local level, create good paying jobs, and make a cleaner more accessible environment for all, and this is how local leaders can learn how to tap this once in a generation investment. I am thrilled to see the EPA kicking off the first in a national series of in-person, community-based events right here in Albany,” said Senator Chuck Schumer (NY). “This day focused on climate action and advancing environmental justice will help ensure disadvantaged communities and community groups get the technical assistance they need to fund long desired green initiatives. I want to sincerely thank the EPA for their leadership and commitment to working with communities across New York to get this money where it is needed most.”

“I’m thrilled to see our Capital Region hosting this initiative that bolsters EPA’s commitment to fostering community-driven partnerships and facilitating access to the historic resources provided through the Inflation Reduction Act and President Biden’s Investing in America agenda. The Regional Roadshow presents a valuable chance for community partners and potential grant applicants to engage, learn about funding opportunities, and collaborate on advancing environmental justice in our communities. I’m proud of my work to help bring the Roadshow to Albany, and I look forward to continuing my partnership with EPA and Administrator Regan to bring critical federal investments home to our region,” said Congressman Paul Tonko (NY-20).

“Region 2 is happy to kickoff this roadshow that will showcase the historic funding that is available under the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) and discuss opportunities on how communities can access it,” said EPA Region 2 Administrator Lisa F. Garcia. “The funding has many opportunities to advance Environmental justice which is a key focus of the EPA.”

“Federal funding from the Inflation Reduction Act is vital to the State’s efforts to combat climate change, advance environmental justice, and ensure a cleaner environment for future generations,” said New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Commissioner Basil Seggos. “New York is primed and ready to get resources to communities facing known and emerging threats to public health and the environment, especially vulnerable communities with a legacy of environmental degradation. With support from the Biden administration, New York is tackling the climate crisis head-on. These community-based events will provide great insight from New Yorkers on next steps moving forward and on-the-ground progress across the state.”

“We are excited to participate in the first EPA Roadshow to discuss ways to support and build capacity for organizations to navigate federal grant application systems, write strong grant proposals, and effectively manage grant funding. We will also leverage this opportunity to build power and capacity in environmental justice organizations working in underserved communities in New Jersey and New York and to develop networks and partnerships throughout the region,” said Peggy Shepard, Co-founder and Executive Director of WE ACT for Environmental Justice.

The Regional Roadshow is a part of EPA’s Community, Equity & Resiliency initiative – a new innovative effort to help communities across the nation navigate EPA’s once-in-a-lifetime new funding opportunities. Through this initiative, EPA’s Office of Air and Radiation and Office of Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights is providing spaces for communities to develop new or deeper community-based partnerships. Regional Roadshow attendees will learn about historic funding and technical assistance through programming that is designed to be especially helpful for overburdened communities. These events will help them confront the climate crisis and advance environmental justice locally as they learn, connect, and cultivate ideas on how to access these extraordinary resources.

Learn more and register for the Regional Roadshow event in Albany, New York.
Today, the Biden-Harris Administration is taking critical steps to advance the American Climate Corps, a landmark initiative announced by President Biden earlier this year to train the next generation of clean energy, conservation, and climate resilience workers, while putting them on a path to good-paying union jobs. As part of this commitment, today seven federal agencies – the Departments of Commerce, The Interior, Agriculture, Labor and Energy, the Environmental Protection Agency, and AmeriCorps – are formally entering into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that will serve as a blueprint for the multiagency program. The MOU lays out the mission, goals, priorities, and next steps for implementing President Biden’s American Climate Corps.

In addition, beginning in January, senior Administration officials will also convene a series of virtual listening sessions to hear directly from prospective American Climate Corps applicants and implementing partners, including labor unions, educational institutions, employer partners, and state, local, and Tribal governments about their priorities for the American Climate Corps. The convenings announced today will inform the implementation of this historic new initiative. More information about the virtual listening sessions can be found on the American Climate Corps website.

“Today’s action is a testament to the Biden-Harris Administration's whole-of-government approach to tackle climate change and promote environmental justice nationwide. EPA continues to be at the center of this ambitious agenda, and now through the American Climate Corps we’ll work across the federal family to advance projects that promote environmental justice, resilience, and clean energy,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “The Climate Corps represents a significant step forward in engaging and nurturing young leaders who are passionate about climate action, furthering our journey towards a sustainable and equitable future.”

Under the MOU, agencies are agreeing to the following principles:

The American Climate Corps will reflect a comprehensive approach to tackling climate change;
The American Climate Corps will build upon and expand existing partnerships, while also initiating new partnerships in communities across the country;
American Climate Corps programs will compensate members to ensure the initiative is accessible to all;
American Climate Corps programs will provide a pathway to high-quality employment;
The American Climate Corps will expand workforce pathways in and led by disadvantaged communities that are marginalized, underserved, and overburdened by pollution; and
The American Climate Corps will serve all of America’s communities by improving climate resilience, reducing climate pollution, and by creating economic opportunity in our urban, rural, suburban, and wilderness remote areas.
The MOU also establishes an Executive Committee – comprised of the Assistant to the President and National Climate Advisor, CEO of AmeriCorps, Secretary of Commerce, Secretary of the Interior, Secretary of Agriculture, Secretary of Labor, Secretary of Energy, and Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency – that will provide leadership across the federal government for the American Climate Corps, as well as a Working Group to formally carry out and implement the initiative.

Within the first three weeks of launching the American Climate Corps, more than 40,000 people, about two-thirds of whom are ages 18-35, expressed interest in joining the initiative. The American Climate Corps is on track to establish the first cohort of members in the summer of 2024. 
Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced a direct award of $8.8 million through President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda to Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use Management (NESCAUM) and a nationwide network of partner air agencies, including in Alaska, Washington, and Idaho. The grant is provided by President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act—the largest climate investment in history—and will support independent testing and data analysis of emissions from new models of woodstoves and wood heating devices. Data collected will help create a ranked listing of appliance performance for certified wood heater models available at retail stores in the United States. This ranking will help consumers and air agencies make decisions about changing out old dirty woodstoves for cleaner models or switching to other heating options.

“Studies estimate that residential wood smoke emissions account for 10,000 – 40,000 premature deaths annually in the United States,” said Joseph Goffman, Principal Deputy Assistant Administrator for the Office of Air and Radiation. “Through this investment under President Biden’s Investing in America agenda, we will help improve our understanding of residential wood smoke so we can better address emissions that primarily impact disadvantaged communities in rural areas.”

Residential wood heating (RWH) emissions contribute to increased ambient particulate matter (PM) concentrations. In some areas, they cause substantial fine particle (PM2.5) concentrations, including rural, underserved communities where air quality may not meet air quality standards for PM2.5.

Information gained from this grant will inform state, local, Tribal, and regional decision-making on wood heater change out programs. The data will also help EPA determine Clean Air Act emissions limits in a new wood heater standard, which could lower wood heater emissions and improve air quality for areas across the country.

For more information, please visit EPA’s website for air grants and funding.
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Philippines Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) established a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on Tuesday, November 14, 2023, to enhance cooperation on environmental issues. The MOU was signed by EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan in Washington, D.C., in advance of a signing ceremony with DENR Secretary Antonia Loyzaga at the DENR headquarters in Quezon City, Manila. The US Ambassador to the Philippines, MaryKay Carlson, witnessed the signing.

This new MOU aims to foster collaboration and information exchange on topics such as air quality, water quality, science-informed policy making, climate change adaptation, solid waste management, environmental impact assessment, environmental incident response, environmental justice, and strengthening enforcement and compliance assurance.  The MOU and other information about the Asia-Pacific region are available on EPA’s website.

 “The United States and the Philippines enjoy a strong and robust partnership, and with today’s action we are extending that partnership to address environmental challenges that affect the health and well-being of our people and our planet,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “This MOU will strengthen our cooperation and enable us to learn from each other’s best practices and innovations.”

Secretary Loyzaga expressed her appreciation for the MOU and announced, “Today is the first step to our journey towards the enhancement to the Department’s institutional capacity to use science and technology in environmental management…Through this partnership we hope to strengthen compliance and enforcement of environmental laws and ensure science informed policy and regulations.”

“This MOU is the direct result of the pledge made by President Biden and President Marcos during their meeting in May to enhance cooperation on environmental and climate change issues,” commented Ambassador Carlson, “and today’s event is a testament to that commitment.”

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) released 2022 greenhouse gas (GHG) data collected under the EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program (GHGRP). In 2022, reported emissions from large industrial sources were approximately 1% lower than in 2021. There has been an overall long-term decreasing trend in industry GHG emissions since 2011, primarily driven by a decrease in emissions from power plants to lower emissions inputs such as natural gas and renewables.

More than 8,100 industrial facilities reported greenhouse gas emissions in 2022 to EPA. The data show that in 2022:

Power plants were the largest stationary source of US greenhouse gas emissions, with 1,332 facilities emitting approximately 1.6 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide. Reported power plant emissions decreased by 0.8% between 2021 and 2022. There is a 28.7% decrease in emissions since 2011 reflecting the long-term shifts in power sector fuel-stock from coal to natural gas.
Petroleum and natural gas systems were the second largest stationary source of emissions, reporting 316 million metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions. Reported emissions for 2022 were 1.2% higher than in 2021, and 14.2% higher than 2016. (2016 is the earliest year of comparable data for this sector, as new industry segments began reporting that year.)
Reported direct emissions from other large sources in the industrial and waste sectors were a combined 793 million metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions in 2022, down 1.8% from 2021, and down 9.3% since 2011.
EPA will be holding an informational webinar to demonstrate its internet-based greenhouse gas data publication tools, including new features and a tutorial on common searches, on October 18, 2023.

This is the thirteenth year of data collection for most sectors under the GHGRP. As directed by Congress, EPA collects annual, facility-level emissions data from major industrial sources, including power plants, oil and gas production, iron and steel mills, and landfills. GHGRP also collects activity data from upstream fossil fuel and industrial gas suppliers. More than 8,100 direct emitters and suppliers report GHG data to GHGRP.

A complete accounting of total US GHG emissions is available through a separate EPA report, the Inventory of US Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks.

Today, in a ceremony at the FMI – The Food Industry Association’s Energy and Store Development Conference, the US Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) GreenChill Program recognized 12 food retail companies and one manufacturer of advanced refrigeration systems for their exceptional achievements to reduce the use of ozone-depleting substances and/or climate-damaging refrigerants.

“Participants in the GreenChill Partnership and Store Certification Programs have been leading the industry in environmentally friendly refrigeration practices, and EPA annually honors their achievements at both the corporate and individual store certification level,” said Paul Gunning, Director of EPA’s Office of Atmospheric Protection. “These companies’ efforts show that it is possible to keep food cool while protecting our Earth’s ozone layer and climate system by setting and achieving ambitious goals year after year.”

GreenChill Partners commit to reducing refrigerant emissions and decreasing their impact on the environment. On average, GreenChill food retailers maintain emissions rates that are approximately half the industry average, resulting in a significant benefit to the environment. Over the past 16 years, GreenChill Partners have avoided emissions of around 599 metric tons of ozone-depleting substances and almost 110 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent. This is roughly equivalent to the greenhouse gas emissions from consuming over 12 billion gallons of gasoline.

This year, EPA is proud to recognize the following GreenChill Partner companies:

Best Emissions Rate

Ashland Food Co-Op (Ashland, Ore.)
Meijer (Grand Rapids, Mich.)
Most Improved Emissions Rate

Brookshire Grocery Company (Tyler, Texas)
Superior Goal Achievement

Ashland Food Co-Op (Ashland, Ore.)
Brookshire Grocery Company (Tyler, Texas)
Food Lion (Salisbury, N.C.)
The GIANT Company (Carlisle, Pa.)
Hannaford (Scarborough, Maine)
King Kullen (Bethpage, N.Y.)
Weis Markets (Sunbury, Pa.)
Exceptional Goal Achievement

Ashland Food Co-Op (Ashland, Ore.)
Food Lion (Salisbury, N.C.)
GreenChill’s Store Certification Program recognized stores for meeting strict performance criteria including refrigeration systems with minimal potential impacts on the ozone layer and climate system. This year’s GreenChill Store Certification recognitions honor:

Store Leadership

Kwik Trip in La Crosse, Wis., is being honored as the first convenience store to receive a GreenChill Certification.
Store Certification Excellence

ALDI (Batavia, Ill.) earned recognition for certifying 628 GreenChill Certified Stores over the past year, more stores than any supermarket chain has previously achieved, all of which were at the highest Platinum-Level Certification.
Hillphoenix (Conyers, Ga.) achieved this recognition for the 11th consecutive year as the commercial systems manufacturer with the most systems installed in GreenChill Certified Stores in the last year.
Store Recertification Excellence

ALDI – A total of 109 locations across California, Connecticut, Georgia, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Virginia, and Wisconsin achieved GreenChill Store Certification for five consecutive years.
Hannaford – The Turner, Maine, store achieved GreenChill Store Certification for 10 consecutive years.
Meijer – The Marysville, Ohio, store achieved GreenChill Store Certification for five consecutive years.
Publix Super Markets – Five locations in Alabama, North Carolina, and South Carolina achieved five-year recertifications.
Target – Two stores in Florida and Illinois achieved GreenChill Store Certification for five consecutive years.
Weis Markets – The Danville, Pennsylvania, store achieved GreenChill Store Certification for five consecutive years.
About the GreenChill Program

GreenChill’s Partnership is a voluntary program for food retailers committed to leading the transition out of ozone-depleting refrigerants, reducing refrigerant emissions, and adopting improved refrigeration management practices and technologies. The goals of the GreenChill Partnership are to provide food retailers and other industry stakeholders with information and assistance to transition to environmentally friendlier refrigerants, lower refrigerant charge sizes, eliminate refrigerant leaks, implement best environmental practices, and adopt green refrigeration technologies.

Since GreenChill launched in 2007, many food retailers have joined the Corporate Emissions Reduction Program (the Partnership) with the number of stores nearly tripling from 4,500 to more than 13,000 stores today in all 50 states. The Partnership represents more than one-third of the US food retail industry.

GreenChill’s Store Certification Program for food retailers continues to grow. In 2022, there were nearly 900 GreenChill Certified Stores throughout the nation. Since it began in 2008, the GreenChill Store Certification Program has issued more than 4,400 annual certifications to over 1,300 individual stores.

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) proposed to strengthen a 2020 Clean Air Act rule by ensuring industrial facilities that emit large amounts of hazardous air pollution cannot increase emissions when reclassifying from a “major source” of emissions to an “area source.” The proposed amendments to the “Reclassification of Major Sources as Area Sources Under Section 112 of the Clean Air Act” rule would require those sources that choose to reclassify from major source status to area source status to establish federally enforceable permit conditions that will better protect public health from hazardous air pollution.

These permit conditions must contain safeguards to prevent emission increases above what would be allowed under a major source emission standard under the Clean Air Act. Facilities would still have the flexibility to pursue innovations in pollution-reduction technologies. The proposed requirements would apply to all sources that choose to reclassify, including any sources which have reclassified since January 25, 2018.

"Today, EPA is proposing additional safeguards to address emissions of hazardous air pollutants from major industrial sources,” said Joseph Goffman, Principal Deputy Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation. “Ensuring facilities do not increase emissions of air toxics after being reclassified will help protect communities from air toxics. This proposal will continue to allow facilities to innovate and adopt new ways of reducing emissions of air toxics while maintaining emission reductions after reclassification.”

EPA’s proposal would strengthen the 2020 rule by preventing the potential for increased emissions from reclassifying sources. The proposal would also require limits taken to reclassify from major source to area source to be federally enforceable. This would provide a level playing field for continued enforcement of limits taken to reclassify, and an additional layer of compliance assurance.

In 1995, EPA issued the “Once In, Always In” Policy and determined that any facility subject to major source hazardous air pollutant (HAP) emissions standards would always remain subject to those standards. The policy was designed to achieve lasting emissions reductions from major sources and ensure continued compliance assurance once air pollution standards for major sources were in place. Under the previous administration, EPA issued a rule that allowed a major source of hazardous air pollutants to reclassify as an area source at any time after agreeing to limit their emissions below the major source thresholds. In response to President Biden’s Executive Order 13990, “Protecting Public Health and the Environment and Restoring Science to Tackle the Climate Crisis,” EPA reviewed the 2020 rule and determined that there were actions we could take to protect against HAP emissions increases. This proposal would address those concerns and prevent increases of emissions of air toxics after reclassification.
Reclassification of Major Sources as Area Sources Under Section 112 of the Clean Air Act | US EPA

The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is announcing its annual “Top Cities” list, spotlighting the cities with the greatest number of ENERGY STAR certified commercial and multifamily buildings in 2022. Coming in at first place for the fourth year in a row, Los Angeles leads with nearly 750 ENERGY STAR certified buildings. In second place is Washington, D.C. with 555 buildings, followed by Atlanta in third place with 376 buildings.

“In many cities, a majority of greenhouse gas emissions results from the energy used by buildings,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “I applaud this year’s top cities, as well as the owners and managers of each ENERGY STAR certified building in them, for taking real action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and help America address the climate crisis.”

Commercial buildings are responsible for 16% of the nation’s greenhouse gas emissions and spend more than $190 billion per year on energy. In many cities, buildings are the largest contributor of emissions — responsible for 30% to more than 70% of a city’s total emissions. ENERGY STAR certified buildings use an average of 35% less energy and are responsible for 35% less carbon dioxide emissions than typical buildings.

First released in 2009, EPA’s list of cities with the most ENERGY STAR certified buildings shows how buildings across America are embracing energy efficiency as a simple and effective way to save money and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. To create the annual list, EPA tallies the number of ENERGY STAR certified buildings within each metropolitan area, as defined by the US Census, which includes the city itself as well as surrounding suburbs. EPA creates separate rankings for mid-sized and small cities. This year’s list includes buildings that earned EPA’s ENERGY STAR during the year 2022.

The signs of climate change are all around us, and children are uniquely vulnerable to its impacts. Climate change-related impacts in childhood can have lifelong consequences due to effects on learning, physical health, and housing security. A new national-scale, multi-sector EPA report showcases some of the ways children are especially vulnerable to a variety of health effects from climate change due to physical, cognitive, behavioral, and social factors.

This peer-reviewed report quantifies projected health effects associated with extreme heat, air quality, changing seasons, flooding, and infectious diseases. Where possible, the analyses consider the extent to which health effects disproportionately fall on children who are Black, Indigenous and people of color [BIPOC], low income, without health insurance, and/or have limited English proficiency.

“Understanding health risks to children is critical for developing effective and equitable strategies that will protect our current and future generations,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “Today’s report will help further efforts being taken by the Biden Administration across the Federal government to address the climate crisis and advance environmental justice.”

The report finds a number of impacts to US children’s health and well-being. For example, at 2°C and 4°C of global warming:

Climate change is expected to increase the incidence of asthma in children. Specifically, climate-driven changes in air quality are estimated to increase annual cases of asthma between 4% and 11%, respectively.
Increases in oak, birch, and grass pollen are projected to increase children’s asthma-related emergency department visits from 17%-30% each year.
Additional cases of Lyme disease in children are projected to rise 79% to 241%, or an additional 2,600 to 23,400 new cases per year.
Heat experienced during the school year affects concentration and learning in children. Climate-driven temperature increases are projected to result in 4% to 7% reductions in annual academic achievement per child. These learning losses can affect future income, with potential losses across cohorts of graduating students reaching billions of dollars annually (and in the thousands of dollars per individual).
If no additional adaptation actions are taken, 1 million to 2 million+ children are estimated to experience temporary home displacement or complete home loss, respectively, from coastal flooding at 50cm to 100cm of global mean sea level.
Today’s report is an important new resource in the Biden-Harris Administration’s efforts to address the climate crisis and advance environmental justice. Agencies across the federal government are working to protect all children from environmental health risks, with EPA particularly focused on impacts to the health of children due to climate change and other environmental factors.

“EPA’s new report offers a clear, compelling overview of how climate change impacts our children’s health. Its findings underscore the necessity of considering children’s well-being in every climate policy — and the moral urgency of taking effective action to stop climate pollution on behalf of younger and future generations,” said Moms Clean Air Force Senior Policy Analyst Elizabeth Bechard. “We know that children are especially vulnerable to nearly all of the health impacts of climate change, from extreme heat and worsened air quality to coastal flooding and increased prevalence of insect-borne diseases. The new report is painful to read. But necessary. It offers an important roadmap for policymakers, parents, teachers, health care providers, and childcare workers by highlighting both the challenges we face and potential solutions. For all who care about children’s well-being, EPA’s new report is a call to action — a call we must answer for our children’s sake.”

“Children are experiencing the impacts of climate change from negative health outcomes impacting their physical and mental health,” said Children's Environmental Health Network Executive Director Nsedu Obot Witherspoon. “It is very important for the EPA and the Biden-Harris Administration to generate this report and take a stand for children and their well-being. Available evidence and lived experience support the fact that children's health is further threatened by increased changing seasons, extreme heat, air quality, flooding, and infectious diseases, all of which are influenced by climate change. We also know that Black, Indigenous, Latino/a/x, Asian and Pacific Islander children, and those from lower wealth families experience cumulative impacts from environmental and climate injustice. We applaud the EPA for this important leadership and will continue to identify ways to collaborate to advance the health of all children from the growing and urgent threat of climate change.”

“As a physician, I understand that the environment is a key determinant of our health,” said Congressman Raul Ruiz, M.D. (CA-25). “This report makes clear the profound impact of climate change on our children's health, well-being, and development and highlights the need to address the climate crisis through a public health lens. I appreciate the Biden Administration's commitment to protecting our children's health, and I look forward to working together on solutions that advance environmental justice for all.”

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) released new details about the design of the $27 billion Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund (GGRF), a first-of-its-kind, national-scale competitive grant program created by the President’s Inflation Reduction Act. This program, part of the Investing in America agenda, will leverage public investment with private capital and finance clean energy projects that reduce pollution and energy costs, increase energy security, and create good-paying jobs, especially in low-income and disadvantaged communities and places that have historically shouldered the burden of harmful pollution. The GGRF will catalyze investment in thousands of clean energy projects, build the capacity of community lenders to drive local economic growth, and deploy cost-saving solar energy on rooftops and in communities across the country.

The release of the GGRF implementation framework comes as the EPA marks Earth Week and the unprecedented investments in protecting the planet and American families and communities as part of President Biden’s Investing in America agenda.

“Thanks to President Biden’s historic investments in America, the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund will strengthen the ability of communities across the country to finance projects that reduce air pollution, lower energy costs for families, bolster America’s energy security, and create good-paying jobs,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “This innovative program will become part of the backbone of the American clean energy finance ecosystem – and with more than half of the investment going to low-income and disadvantaged communities, it will ensure that all communities can participate in America’s growing clean energy economy.”

This implementation framework follows the initial guidance EPA released earlier this year and outlines a clear vision for the three grant competitions EPA will administer under the GGRF program, including preliminary descriptions of key parameters, application requirements, and reporting obligations.

The release of this framework builds on months of robust stakeholder engagement efforts with input collected from state, local, and Tribal governments; community lenders; environmental justice organizations; industry groups; labor; and environmental finance experts across the country.

The implementation framework is intended to provide continued transparency and respond to stakeholder requests for additional information on EPA’s anticipated program design and application requirements in advance of the Notices of Funding Opportunity that will formally kick off the application process as early as June 2023 and reflect EPA’s final determinations on program priorities and requirements.

EPA will require rigorous transparency, risk management, and accountability measures of  grantees under this program to ensure this historic investment is invested efficiently in accordance with the law and for the maximum benefit of American families.

“EPA is proud to release this significant update months ahead of when competitions will open to provide transparency to the public, allow for stakeholder feedback, and give prospective applicants time to form strong visions, partnerships, and application materials,” said Senior Advisor and Acting Director of the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund Jahi Wise. “EPA is working diligently to design a program that leverages private capital into pollution reducing clean technology projects while investing resources in the communities that have been left on the sidelines for too long, and safeguarding public dollars to deliver on the potential of this historic opportunity.”

“The Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund is one of the most transformative actions created in the Inflation Reduction Act to make access to reliable and clean solar power easier for millions of Americans, and the steps taken today will be the blueprint for making this historic program a reality. The GGRF is a giant leap forward for bringing clean energy and reducing air pollution for communities who are too often left behind,” said US Senate Majority Leader Charles E. Schumer (NY). “Delivering on environmental justice was one of my north stars while writing the Inflation Reduction Act, and the GGRF is poised to be one of the most significant vehicles for delivering lasting support to our environmental justice communities. When you invest in renewable energy you are investing in the technology of the future and a better world for our children and grandchildren.  I am proud to have led this historic program to passage in the Inflation Reduction Act to lower costs for families and creating good paying jobs securing America’s energy independent future.”

“In the Inflation Reduction Act, we provided EPA with historic resources to address the threat of climate change in a way that benefits communities across our nation,” said US Senator Tom Carper, Chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee. “Now, I’m pleased to see that EPA is implementing the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund to help finance clean energy projects, including in low-income and disadvantaged communities, and create good-paying jobs. By leveraging public and private investments, this program will not only reduce harmful pollution and lower energy costs but also help grow America’s clean energy economy for years to come—a win-win-win.”

“The Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund is a groundbreaking, first-of-its-kind program that will invest in clean energy deployment and carbon pollution reduction projects across the country, putting us on track to meet our climate goals,” said US Representative Frank Pallone, Jr., Ranking Member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee (NJ-06). “With this announcement, EPA is taking an important step toward getting this much needed funding out to communities to help build a cleaner, healthier, and more sustainable future. I fought hard to make sure this program was enacted into law and appreciate EPA’s work to engage with stakeholders as they design it. I look forward to working with EPA to ensure this funding has the greatest impact, especially for those communities that have been underserved for far too long.”

“As one of the lead authors of the statute underpinning the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund investment in climate finance for disadvantaged communities, I am grateful to Environmental Protection Agency leadership for their transparency, collaboration, and progress on making this vision a reality,” said US Senator Ed Markey, Chair of the Environment and Public Works Subcommittee on Clean Air, Climate, and Nuclear Safety (MA). “This program has the potential to unleash tens of billions in much-needed private investments by leveraging the power, expertise, and long-standing relationships that public, semi-public, and non-profit community lenders can bring to bear in a joint national fight against the climate crisis. I look forward to continuing to work with the Administration and to hearing from stakeholders as we continue to work on this coordinated, justice-focused, and urgently needed new program.”

“At a time when working families are struggling to pay their energy bills and are dealing with the devastating effects of climate change, we must expand the use of rooftop solar in America, cut carbon pollution, and help create millions of good jobs,” said US Senator Bernie Sanders (VT). “I am pleased that the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund includes a $7 billion ‘Solar for All’ program that I introduced to make it more affordable for low-income and working-class families to install solar on their homes and save money on their electricity bills. I look forward to continuing to work with stakeholders and the EPA on this program to make residential solar a reality for the millions of low-income and working families who need it the most.”

“A national climate bank network will generate more clean energy, fewer emissions, and more good paying jobs across the country. That’s why I worked to craft legislation to make this a reality, and I’m encouraged to see the EPA take the next key step toward launching this program. This framework reflects true progress for a self-sustaining climate bank network that will dramatically boost our financial capacity to deliver the economic and environmental benefits we’ve fought for so long to secure,” said US Senator Chris Van Hollen (MD).

“The Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund is the single largest investment in clean energy and environmental justice in American history, based on proven green bank models that have been effectively enacted across the country,” said US Representative Debbie Dingell (MI-06). “This new guidance from the EPA today is an important step forward in making sure we successfully implement the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund to ensure these funds reach the communities and projects that need them most, prioritizing low-income and historically disadvantaged areas. I’ll continue working with the EPA, my colleagues in Congress, and all our partners as we continue to move closer to an equitable clean energy economy.”

Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund Grant Competitions

EPA will hold three complementary competitions to strategically distribute grant funding under the $27 billion GGRF program. While each competition will be administered separately, EPA expects that these competitions will work in tandem to deliver tangible benefits including lower energy costs, good-paying jobs and improved public health outcomes to households, businesses, and communities. The three competitions will be:

The $14 billion National Clean Investment Fund competition will fund two to three national nonprofits that will partner with private capital providers to deliver financing at scale to businesses, communities, community lenders, and others, catalyzing tens of thousands of clean technology projects to accelerate our progress towards energy independence and a net-zero economic future.
The $6 billion Clean Communities Investment Accelerator competition will fund two to seven hub nonprofits with the plans and capabilities to rapidly build the clean financing capacity of specific networks of public, quasi-public and non-profit community lenders—including community development financial institutions (including Native CDFIs), credit unions, green banks, housing finance agencies, and minority depository institutions—to ensure that households, small businesses, schools, and community institutions in low-income and disadvantaged communities have access to financing for cost-saving and pollution-reducing clean technology projects.
The $7 billion Solar for All competition will provide up to 60 grants to States, Tribal governments, municipalities, and nonprofits to expand the number of low-income and disadvantaged communities that are primed for residential and community solar investment—enabling millions of families to access affordable, resilient, and clean solar energy.
EPA will implement these programs in alignment with President Biden’s Justice40 Initiative, which aims to ensure that 40% of the overall benefits of certain Federal investments flow to disadvantaged communities that are marginalized, underserved, and overburdened by pollution. EPA expects to open competitions for funding under the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund by summer 2023.

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced several enforcement actions that support national and international goals to reduce the use of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) in our fight against climate change. These civil penalty actions include three landmark settlements with HFC importers who failed to report their imported quantities in violation of the Clean Air Act’s (CAA) Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program: Artsen Chemical America, LLC ($247,601 penalty), Harp USA, Inc. ($275,000 penalty), and the IGas Companies ($382,473 penalty). EPA is aggressively pursuing similar actions against several other importers that failed to report their HFCs.

EPA also recently issued the first notices of violation (NOVs) under the American Innovation and Manufacturing Act of 2020 (AIM Act) to alleged violators who imported regulated substances without required allowances. Under the AIM Act, importers are required to expend allowances to import HFCs. Compliance with the allowance system is critical to assuring the success of the United States’ HFC phasedown program. Illegal imports undermine the phasedown, disadvantage companies who follow the rules, and contribute to global warming.

"These NOVs demonstrate EPA's commitment to enforcing the American Innovation and Manufacturing Act of 2020," said Larry Starfield, Acting Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “In addition, our Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program settlements with HFC importers recognize that accurate data is essential for setting sound climate change policy.”

Stopping illegal HFC imports is a top priority of a federal interagency task force that includes EPA and US Customs and Border Protection. In fiscal year 2022, the task force prevented illegal HFC imports equal to more than 889,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide. This equates to the carbon dioxide released from powering 173,000 homes with electricity for a year.

HFCs are commonly used in refrigeration and air conditioning equipment. Released to the atmosphere, HFCs can have a climate impact thousands of times stronger than carbon dioxide. Enforcement of the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program demonstrates the Biden Administration’s commitment to address HFCs and protect our climate. The United States agreed under the bipartisan AIM Act to phasedown HFC production and consumption by 85% by 2036, consistent with the international HFC phasedown laid out in the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol. Global efforts to phase down HFCs are expected to avoid up to 0.5 °C of global warming by 2100. Accurate reporting of HFCs helps set sound policy and going forward under the HFC phasedown will allow the United States to verify we are meeting the limits under the AIM Act.

Today, the Biden-Harris Administration is making $250 million available to develop innovative strategies to cut climate pollution and build clean energy economies. These planning grants, through the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), are the first tranche of funding going to states, local governments, Tribes, and territories from the $5 billion Climate Pollution Reduction Grants (CPRG) program created by President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act. The program provides flexible planning resources for states, Tribes, territories, and municipalities to develop and implement scalable solutions that protect people from pollution and advance environmental justice.

All 50 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico are eligible to receive $3 million in grant funds. In addition, each of the 67 most populous metropolitan areas in the country are eligible to receive $1 million for plans to tackle climate pollution locally. EPA is also making millions in noncompetitive planning grant funds available to territory and tribal governments. Later this year, EPA will launch a competition for $4.6 billion in funding to implement projects and initiatives included in these plans. States, cities, territories, and Tribes can also use this funding to develop strategies for using the other grant, loan, and tax provisions secured by President Biden’s historic legislation, including the Inflation Reduction Act and Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, to achieve their clean energy, climate, and environmental justice goals.

“We know that tackling the climate crisis demands a sense of urgency to protect people and the planet,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act is a historic opportunity to provide communities across the country with the resources they need to protect people from harmful climate pollution and improve our economy. These Climate Pollution Reduction Grants are an important first step to equip communities with the resources to create innovative strategies that reduce climate emissions and drive benefits across the country.”

President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act includes historic funding to combat climate change while creating good-paying jobs and advancing environmental justice. Today’s announcement builds on $550 million announced last week for EPA’s new Environmental Justice Thriving Communities Grantmaking program and $100 million announced earlier this year for environmental justice grants to support underserved and overburdened communities. Additionally, the Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund will award nearly $27 billion to leverage private capital for clean energy and clean air investments across the country.

About the Climate Pollution Reduction Grant Program

The CPRG planning grants will support states, territories, Tribes, municipalities and air agencies, in the creation of comprehensive, innovative strategies for reducing pollution and ensuring that investments maximize benefits, especially for low-income and disadvantaged communities. These climate plans will include:

Greenhouse gas emissions inventories;
Emissions projections and reduction targets;
Economic, health, and social benefits, including to low-income and disadvantaged communities;
Plans to leverage other sources of federal funding including the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation Reduction Act;
Workforce needs to support decarbonization and a clean energy economy; and
Future government staffing and budget needs.
In program guidance released today, EPA describes how the Agency intends to award and manage CPRG funds to eligible entities, including states, metropolitan areas, Tribes, and territories.

States

Under the formula-based program for planning grants, the governments of all states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico are eligible for up to $3 million. Each state government will be expected to develop or update any existing climate action plan in collaboration with sub-state jurisdictions including air pollution control districts and large and small municipalities statewide, and to conduct meaningful engagement including with low income and disadvantaged communities throughout its jurisdiction.

Metropolitan Areas

To further EPA’s efforts to cover as much of the population as possible under regional planning grants, the 67 most populous metropolitan areas will be awarded $1 million each to develop regional planning grants with key stakeholders in their area. Communities that do not rank in the top 67 most populous areas will have opportunities to partner with their states and neighboring jurisdictions.

Territories & Tribes

The territories of Guam, American Samoa, US Virgin Islands, and the Northern Mariana Islands as well as federally recognized Indian Tribes are also eligible entities; their application process is detailed in a separate program guidance.

Tribes have a set-aside of $25 million, for grants up to $500,000 for a single Tribe or $1 million for groups of 2 or more. Territories are eligible for up to $500,000 each. Applicants are not required to provide a cost-share or matching funds for this funding.

Next Steps

States must submit a notice of intent to participate by March 31, 2023; the 67 most populous metropolitan areas nationally must submit a notice of intent to participate by April 28, 2023. EPA strongly encourages all eligible entities to review the complete program guidance documents available on EPA’s website to learn more about these planning grants, details about eligibility criteria and allocation formulas, important deadlines, and other requirements.

This funding for climate planning will be followed later this year by $4.6 billion in implementation grant funding that will support the expeditious implementation of investment-ready policies created by the CPRG planning grants, programs, and projects to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the near term. Through the CPRG program, EPA will support the development and deployment of technologies and solutions that will reduce greenhouse gas emissions and harmful air pollution, as well as transition America to a clean energy economy that benefits all Americans.

Key Program Dates

States and metropolitan areas have different deadlines to notify EPA that they intend to opt-in to the climate planning grants.

States will have until March 31, 2023, to opt in to this grant by submitting a notice of intent to participate. The lead organization for the state will then need to submit an application, which will include a workplan and budget for the planning grant, by April 28, 2023. States can work with EPA regional offices during this time.
Metropolitan areas have until April 28, 2023, to opt in. The lead organization for the metropolitan area will then need to submit an application, which will include a workplan and budget for the planning grant, by May 31, 2023. Metropolitan areas can work with EPA regional offices during this time.
Tribes and territories have a separate program guidance, process and deadlines with applications and workplans due by June 15, 2023. EPA’s regional offices will work closely with Tribes and territories to support their successful application. They should work closely with their EPA region toward submitting an application and workplan by June 15, 2023.

 Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced it is seeking public comment on its proposal to address environmental justice, climate change, and PFAS contamination in its National Enforcement and Compliance Initiatives (NECIs).  Every four years, EPA selects national initiatives to focus resources on serious and widespread environmental problems where federal enforcement can make a difference. The primary objective of these initiatives is to protect human health and the environment by holding polluters accountable through enforcement and assisting regulated entities to return to compliance.

EPA proposes to continue four of the six current national initiatives during the FY 2024-2027 cycle and return two of the current national initiatives to the core enforcement and compliance program. In addition, EPA proposes to address environmental justice concerns in all NECIs, and to add two new NECIs on mitigating climate change and addressing PFAS pollution, for the FY 2024-2027 cycle.

“The National Enforcement and Compliance Initiatives identify serious environmental challenges where EPA can make a difference through a coordinated national approach,” said Larry Starfield, Acting Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “We look forward to receiving public comment on our proposals for FY 2024-2027, which include both familiar and emerging issues.  Of particularly importance, we have built environmental justice considerations firmly into every initiative in order to protect vulnerable and overburdened communities.”

In selecting initiatives for the FY 2024-2027 cycle, EPA will consider the following three criteria to evaluate the existing and proposed new initiatives: 1) the need to address serious and widespread environmental issues and significant violations impacting human health and the environment, particularly in overburdened and vulnerable communities; 2) areas where federal enforcement can help ensure national consistency, promote a level playing field, and achieve compliance; and 3) alignment with the Agency’s Strategic Plan.

Proposed Initiatives

EPA is proposing to continue the following four current NECIs in the FY 2024-2027 cycle:

Creating Cleaner Air for Communities by Reducing Excess Emissions of Harmful Pollutants.
Reducing Risks of Accidental Releases at Industrial and Chemical Facilities.
Reducing Significant Non-Compliance in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Program.
Reducing Non-Compliance with Drinking Water Standards at Community Water Systems.
EPA is proposing to return these two current NECIs to the core enforcement and compliance programs:

Reducing Toxic Air Emissions from Hazardous Waste Facilities.
Stopping Aftermarket Defeat Devices for Vehicles and Engines.
EPA is proposing to add these two new NECIs in the FY 2024-2027 cycle:

Mitigating Climate Change.
Addressing PFAS Contamination.
EPA is also taking comment on whether to add an NECI to address Coal Combustion Residuals (CCR) pollution and/or lead contamination. The Agency is also accepting additional suggestions from the public.

Name Change for Initiatives

While formal enforcement remains the key tool to address serious environmental problems and significant violations, as well as create general deterrence, EPA also uses a variety of compliance assurance tools to achieve this objective. To reflect this comprehensive approach, EPA has changed the name of its priority initiatives from “National Compliance Initiatives” (NCIs) to “National Enforcement and Compliance Initiatives” (NECIs).

EPA is soliciting comments on the proposed changes to the NECIs during a 60 public comment period.

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced the availability of $50 million in grant funding from President Biden’s Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to help states, Tribes and territories develop and implement Underground Injection Control (UIC) Class VI programs. Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, Class VI programs ensure that groundwater resources are protected while supporting geologic sequestration of carbon dioxide (CO2) to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and mitigate climate change.

“EPA is excited to provide funding from President Biden’s Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to our state and Tribal partners to develop programs that protect our essential groundwater resources and combat the climate crisis,” said EPA Assistant Administrator for Water Radhika Fox. “This funding demonstrates just one of the many ways EPA is working collaboratively to ensure that all people have clean and safe water.”

EPA supports efforts by states, Tribes, and territories to implement existing primacy programs and seek primary enforcement and permitting responsibility (primacy) for Class VI programs. EPA is inviting states, Tribes and territories to submit letters of intent to indicate their interest in this new funding, and interested parties have until March 20, 2023 to submit their letters. After receiving submissions, EPA will determine funding allocations and award the full $50 million in a one-time distribution.

As a condition of receiving funding, applicants to the new Class VI UIC grant program must demonstrate how environmental justice and equity considerations will be incorporated into their Class VI UIC primacy programs. Primacy program commitments may include identifying communities with potential environmental justice concerns, enhancing public involvement, appropriately scoped environmental justice assessments, enhancing transparency throughout the permitting process and minimizing adverse effects associated with permitting actions.

Background

The geologic sequestration of CO2 in UIC Class VI wells is used in carbon capture and storage to prevent CO2 emissions from industrial sources from reaching the atmosphere. The CO2 is injected through specially constructed wells that extend into deep rock formations. These formations must be tested and selected based on geologic characteristics suitable for the safe containment of CO2 for long-term storage. This technology will provide well-paying jobs and promote environmentally responsible industry.

EPA has, under the Safe Drinking Water Act, developed stringent federal requirements for injecting CO2 that protect public health by ensuring injection wells do not contaminate underground sources of drinking water (USDWs). These UIC regulations mandate using a variety of measures to assure that injection activities will not endanger USDWs.

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced initial public engagement and input opportunities for a subset of new and existing programs funded by President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act. These programs, which include funding for air quality projects and climate projects addressing clean energy, transportation, methane emissions, and climate super-pollutants, will advance the President’s bold agenda to combat the climate crisis, protect public health and advance environmental justice.

“The Inflation Reduction Act provides states, tribes, communities and organizations with the unprecedented opportunity to make lasting progress to equitably protect people and the planet from air pollution and climate change,” said Joseph Goffman, Principal Deputy Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Air and Radiation. “We are eager to engage with all who have a stake in the success of these efforts, and our next steps will be guided by the wisdom and experience from the conversations we have and the feedback we receive over the next several months.”

EPA’s engagement strategy for these programs includes:

Request for Information (RFI): Issuing a request for public input to inform program design;
Expert Input: Soliciting expert input on key program design questions from EPA’s Federal Advisory Committees including the Local Government Advisory Committee, Clean Air Act Advisory Committee and the National Environmental Justice Advisory Committee;
Listening Sessions: Launching a stakeholder listening session series to enable key stakeholders including environmental justice communities, state and local governments, clean energy advocates, labor, and others to provide input directly to EPA staff; and
New Webpage: Creating a one-stop shop for information on the implementation of Inflation Reduction Act programs managed by EPA’s Office of Air and Radiation.
Today, EPA published a Request for Information (RFI) seeking public comment on core design aspects of multiple Inflation Reduction Act programs, a crucial first step as the Agency works to implement historic levels of funding from this legislation. These initial engagements will help ensure the design and implementation of the programs reflect input from a broad coalition of stakeholders to ensure the full economic and environmental benefits of this historic investment are realized by all people, particularly those who have been most burdened by environmental, social, and economic injustice.

The RFI provides background information and questions for the public to consider as they provide their input. EPA will gather and organize information received on the RFI in six public dockets that correspond to Inflation Reduction Act provisions in the law. In addition, the agency will continue to conduct extensive public engagement as it works to implement the law.

Public Encouraged to Review and Comment in Six Public Dockets

DOCKET 1: Climate Pollution Reduction Grants

EPA received $5 billion to assist states, air pollution control agencies, Tribes and local governments to develop and implement strong climate pollution reduction strategies. These eligible entities can apply for planning grants and then apply for grants to implement those plans.

DOCKET 2: Transportation Programs

EPA received $4 billion for two new programs to reduce emissions from the transportations sector. The first program is the Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicle program that will invest $1 billion to help cover the costs of replacing dirty heavy-duty vehicles with clean alternatives, deploy supporting infrastructure, and/or train and develop the necessary workforce. At least $400 million must go to areas not meeting national air quality health standards. The application is open to states, municipalities, Indian tribes, nonprofit school transportation associations, and eligible contractors.



The second program will provide $3 billion in grants to reduce air pollution at ports with at least $750 million going to areas not meeting air quality standards. These funds can be used for a range of activities including purchasing and installing zero-emission port equipment and technology, covering the associated costs of planning and permitting, and developing qualified climate action plans. Eligible entities include port authorities; any state, regional, local, or tribal agency with jurisdiction over a port authority; air pollution control agencies; and non-profits and private entities partnering with the above and own, operate, or use port facilities.

DOCKET 3: Methane Emissions Reduction Program

EPA received $1.55 billion to reduce methane emissions from the oil and gas sector by providing financial assistance (grants, rebates, contracts, loans, and other activities) and technical assistance as well as implementing a statutorily required waste emissions charge. Eligible recipients for these funds include, but are not limited to, air pollution control agencies, other public or nonprofit private agencies, institutions, organizations, and individuals. The program specifies that at least $700 million must be used for activities at marginal conventional wells. Section 60113 also requires EPA to implement a waste emission charge on methane emitted from applicable oil and gas facilities that emit over 25,000 metric tons of CO2e and that exceed statutorily specified waste emissions thresholds beginning in 2024. The waste emissions charge will start at $900 and increase to $1,500 per metric ton.

Docket 4: Funding to Address Air Pollution

EPA received over $300 million in funding to support the agency’s air quality mission by investing in a range of activities that will increase monitoring in and by communities, expand and strengthen national monitoring methods, improve monitoring methods and capacity, make monitoring data more available and useful for communities, and improve air quality in our nation’s schools. Six of these programs are authorized under Section 60105. This section establishes a wide range of eligible applicants that includes individuals, state, local and Tribal Air pollution control agencies, and other public or nonprofit private agencies, institutions, and organizations EPA also received $50 million in Section 60106 to address air pollution at schools with $12.5 million dedicated to providing technical assistance and the remainder for grants and other activities to monitor and reduce air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions  at schools in low-income and disadvantaged communities. Eligible applicants for this funding include individuals, air pollution control agencies, and other public nonprofit private agencies, institutions, and organizations.



Docket 5: Funding for Implementation of American Innovation and Manufacturing (AIM) Act

Funding includes $38.5 million for implementation of the AIM Act to implement the Kigali Agreement on hydrofluorocarbons. Of this funding, $15 million is dedicated towards new competitive grants for reclaim and innovative destruction technologies, $20 million is dedicated to EPA to carry out the AIM Act, and $3.5 million is dedicated to EPA to deploy new implementation and compliance tools for the AIM Act.



Docket 6: Low Emissions Electricity Program & GHG Corporate Reporting



Low Emissions Electricity Program

Funding includes $87 million to fund a wide range of activities to encourage low emissions electricity generation through education, technical assistance, and partnerships with consumers, low income and disadvantaged communities, industry, and state, local, and Tribal governments.





GHG Corporate Reporting

Funding includes $5 million to enhance standardization and transparency of corporate climate action commitments and plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, enhance transparency regarding progress toward meeting such commitments and implementing such plans, and make progress toward meeting such commitments and implementing such plans.

The RFI and more information on how to comment is available at this website.

Background

In August 2022, Congress passed, and President Biden signed, the Inflation Reduction Act into law, creating the largest investment to combat the climate crisis in US history. The Inflation Reduction Act will bolster US energy security, help families save money on energy costs and prescription drugs, reduce the deficit, and create good-paying jobs. EPA received $41.5 billion in appropriations to develop and support 24 new and existing programs that monitor and reduce greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution, protect health and advance environmental justice. Today’s RFI seeks public input on a significant portion of this total, and the agency will use the information received to guide the next steps to deliver these historic resources to where they can do the most good for communities across the country.

October is Children’s Health Month and this year the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is spotlighting the historic resources advancing protection of children’s environmental health. The EPA is committed to protecting children at all stages and in all communities.

“Protecting the health of our children and the environment where they live, learn and play is central to EPA’s mission, especially when it comes to children in overburdened and underserved areas,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “As we mark Children’s Health Month, I’m honored to highlight EPA’s work to protect children’s health and the historic level of funding from President Biden’s Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation Reduction Act, that will bolster these efforts to deliver clean air, clean water and healthy lands for our children.”

EPA understands that early exposures to pollution can affect health later in life. At EPA, the Office of Children’s Health Protection works across Agency programs to identify and address health disparities so that all children, no matter their zip code, race, or income, can be protected equally under the law. EPA’s Children’s Health Policy and Strategic Plan ensures that the Agency considers environmental impacts at all stages, starting from maternal health, infancy, adolescence, and into early adulthood.

Under the Biden-Harris Administration, EPA has advanced programs to protect children’s health with the support of historic funding from the American Rescue Plan and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. EPA expects to take further protective actions with support from the Inflation Reduction Act, including providing grants and technical assistance to improve indoor air quality in schools.

EPA initiatives to protect children’s health include:

EPA’s Clean Bus Program will invest $5 billion over the next 5 years to replace existing diesel school buses with zero-emission and low-emission models resulting in reduced greenhouse gas emissions and other air pollutants that are harmful to children’s health.
Distribution of $2 million from the American Rescue Plan to communities to address disproportionate environmental or public health harms and risks to children in underserved communities.
EPA announced winners of the Let’s Talk About Heat Challenge, a competition focused on innovative communication strategies to warn people, including children, of the risks of extreme heat and provide solutions on how to keep safe during the hottest days.
EPA published revised factsheets on climate change to explain its impacts on maternal and children’s health.
EPA commissioned a National Academy of Science Workshop focused on children’s environmental health and future priorities that can be viewed online.
The Agency revamped the Children’s Health Month webpage with useful children’s environmental health resources and tools for those who wish to get involved this October.

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency issued for public input a draft white paper on control techniques and measures that could reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from new stationary combustion turbines. These turbines, which are currently projected to be a significant part of US electricity generation in future years, primarily use natural gas to create electricity. The draft white paper is an important step forward in EPA’s efforts to engage communities and the power sector on strategies to improve clean air and reduce climate pollution in the years ahead.

“As part of our comprehensive power sector strategy announced by Administrator Regan last month, this white paper is intended to advance EPA’s work to cut greenhouse gas emissions and amplify the leadership that we are seeing from power companies, states, investors, communities and other organizations,” said Principal Deputy Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation Joseph Goffman. “This is an important dialogue to have now, as we tackle our climate and health goals to protect communities while ensuring clean, reliable and affordable electricity.”

Recent Energy Information Administration (EIA) projections show the power sector is likely to continue investing in new stationary combustion turbines – both combined cycle and simple cycle turbines. With the draft white paper, EPA plans to engage with the states, Tribes, communities, power sector leaders, the public, and other stakeholders about the applicability and feasibility of a wide a range of potential mitigation options for GHG pollution from new stationary combustion turbines.

The draft white paper presents information on the performance of state-of-the-art combustion turbine technologies and describes additional opportunities for GHG emission cuts. Specifically, the draft white paper discusses the potential of efficiency improvements; of firing or co-firing natural gas with alternative fuels such as hydrogen; of using carbon capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS) technology; and of co-location with energy storage, among other topics. While the white paper doesn’t set policy or establish performance standards, it helps inform a robust public dialogue on approaches to reduce climate pollution from new gas-fired turbines.

Although the white paper is not targeted to any specific regulatory or policy context, EPA anticipates that the white paper may be useful to inform future rulemaking efforts, to serve as a resource for states and a variety of stakeholders, and to initiate a broader conversation on the future of natural gas-fired power generating sources.

The information may assist states and local air pollution control agencies, Tribal authorities, and regulated entities in their consideration of technologies and measures that may be implemented to reduce GHG emissions from stationary combustion turbines. The discussion of technologies and measures in this paper may also provide context for permit development under the prevention of significant deterioration (PSD) program of the Clean Air Act, including in the assessment of the best available control technology (BACT) for GHG emissions from stationary combustion turbines.  States and the public may also find the white paper useful to inform state-level actions to combat climate change and individual permitting considerations. In addition, EPA anticipates the public dialogue on the draft will help inform the Agency’s ongoing review of the Clean Air Act section 111(b) new source performance standard for new natural gas-fired stationary combustion turbine electric utility generating units.

The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today announced settlements with Canadian-based Crescent Point Energy US Corp. (Crescent Point) and Houston, Texas-based EP Energy E & P Company, L.P. (EP Energy) resolving alleged violations of the federal Clean Air Act at oil and gas production facilities in Utah’s Uinta Basin.

The Crescent Point settlement requires the company to pay a civil penalty of $3 million for violations of requirements to control volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions from storage tanks at 30 previously owned oil and gas production facilities. The EP Energy settlement resolves similar violations across 246 production facilities and requires the company to pay a civil penalty of $700,000, take extensive measures to ensure future compliance, and implement a $1.2 million mitigation project to install pollution controls at facilities that are not otherwise subject to control requirements.

Both settlements were filed in the US District Court for the District of Utah yesterday afternoon simultaneously with complaints that the two companies’ oil and gas production operations in the Uinta Basin violated requirements to control VOC emissions from storage tanks. The State of Utah is a co-Plaintiff in both actions.

“These settlements are a victory for communities in the Uinta Basin and across the State of Utah,” said Larry Starfield, Acting Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “This is part of EPA’s ongoing effort to bring cleaner air to communities by ensuring that oil and gas production operations meet the requirements of the Clean Air Act.”

VOCs are a key component in the formation of ground-level ozone, a pollutant that irritates the lungs, exacerbates diseases such as asthma, and can increase susceptibility to respiratory illnesses, such as pneumonia and bronchitis. The production facilities covered by this settlement are in the Uinta Basin, an area that does not meet National Ambient Air Quality Standards established under the Clean Air Act for ground-level ozone. The emission reductions achieved through these settlements will directly benefit air quality and residents in rural and tribal communities throughout the Basin.

The $3 million Crescent Point civil penalty will be split evenly between the United States and the State of Utah. Crescent Point has agreed to deposit $1.2 million of the $1.5 million civil penalty owed to Utah into the State’s Environmental Mitigation and Response Fund for air quality-related projects across the state.

The $700,000 EP Energy civil penalty will be split evenly between the United States and the State of Utah. EP Energy has agreed to deposit $280,000 of the $350,000 owed to Utah, with interest, into the State’s Environmental Mitigation and Response Fund for air quality-related projects across the state. EP Energy emerged from bankruptcy on October 1, 2020, and the United States and Utah previously resolved alleged violations subject to a proof of claim in the bankruptcy court for $100,000.

Under the Consent Decree, EP Energy will implement extensive design, operation, and maintenance improvements at 246 oil and gas production facilities. EP Energy will also spend $1.2 million to mitigate past excess emissions by installing pollution controls at 36 uncontrolled facilities. This project will reduce VOC emissions by approximately 370 tons per year as a result of installing emission control devices at uncontrolled facilities. The Consent Decree requires EP Energy to post verifications of facility design, required certifications, and the final mitigation report on its website.

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is releasing new and updated resources to support states as they work to address the climate crisis and reduce climate pollution.  These resources include new state-level data on greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) and sinks, updates to EPA’s existing State Inventory Tool to help states compile their own emission and sink estimates, and information on state-level opportunities to reduce emissions of highly-potent greenhouse gases.

“Tackling the climate crisis requires action across all levels of government, and our partnership with states has never been more important to reduce emissions and deliver solutions,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “The high-quality, peer-reviewed data and analyses released today will support our state partners as we work to track climate trends and confront this challenge together.”

Many states are working to improve their state-level greenhouse gas data to help identify opportunities to reduce emissions. The resources EPA is releasing today will complement and supplement official state data and provide states more information to identify pathways to reduce highly potent greenhouse gases. EPA’s peer-reviewed data sets provide comprehensive, consistent, and comparable data for every state — providing state governments, the public, and stakeholders with high-quality information for policy assessment and development. EPA will also continue providing technical assistance to help states develop inventories of GHG emissions and execute strategies that reduce those emissions.

The data released will also allow researchers and the public to better understand emissions and mitigation potential in their state. While climate change is a national and international issue, states play a vital role in helping advance solutions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

The new data and updated tools announced today include the following:

State-level data on greenhouse gas emissions and sinks:  The Inventory of US Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks by State provides state-by-state emission and sinks data consistent with the national greenhouse gas inventory, and with international standards. The state-level GHG Inventory provides annual emissions estimates from 1990 through 2019 and will be updated each year.
Updates to the State Inventory Tool: EPA’s existing State Inventory Tool helps states to compile and analyze their own estimates of GHG emissions and sinks. The new version of the tool updates and extends calculations through 2019 and better aligns the tool with the new Inventory by State estimates.
Information on state-level opportunities to reduce emissions of potent greenhouse gases: The US State-level Non-CO2 Mitigation Analysis provides states with improved data to better understand the costs and opportunities for reducing emissions of potent greenhouse gases, including methane, nitrous oxide, and fluorinated gases. This report looks at projected emissions of these gases through 2050 and provides comprehensive technical and economic data on the opportunities and costs for reducing emissions.
These data and supporting technical reports draw on data and findings from EPA’s Inventory of US Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks. EPA works in collaboration with numerous experts from other federal agencies, state agencies, research and academic institutions, and industry associations to compile the Inventory.

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announces the selection of 11 organizations expected to receive a total of approximately $2 million in funding to divert food waste from landfills by expanding anaerobic digester capacity nationwide. Anaerobic digestion (AD) is a process in which microorganisms break down organic materials, such as food scraps, manure, and sewage sludge, in the absence of oxygen. The process produces biogas, which can be captured and used for energy production, and digestate, a nutrient-rich product used for fertilizer.

“Anaerobic digestion is an important way to ensure essential nutrients are recirculated into our ecosystems,” said Carlton Waterhouse, Deputy Assistant Administrator for the EPA Office of Land and Emergency Management. “This kind of innovation helps communities reduce food waste that could end up in landfills while capturing methane for use, instead of having it go into the atmosphere.”

By decreasing the amount of wasted food in landfills, AD reduces landfill methane emissions, in turn reducing impacts of climate change. Methane traps 28 to 36 times more heat in the atmosphere over a 100-year period than carbon dioxide. Additionally, AD is a strategy included in EPA’s food recovery hierarchy that is preferable to landfilling and incineration because it reclaims valuable resources, contributing to a circular economy. Keeping food waste out of landfills by transforming it into fuel or fertilizer can save money and reduce environmental impacts.

EPA is prioritizing environmental justice by ensuring nearly half of the funds announced today will be awarded to projects or recipients located in underserved communities. Specifically, EPA considered the effects of this program on people of color, low-income, tribal, and indigenous populations, and other vulnerable populations, such as the elderly and children.

Each selected organization will receive a range of approximately $150,000 - $200,000 over a two-year period. The 11 organizations selected for AD project funding are:

District of Columbia Department of Public Works (Washington, D.C.): Plans to establish a training and certification program for commercial food waste generators that will equip the participants to set up successful source-separated organics programs to divert food waste to anaerobic digesters for processing.
Food Lifeline (Seattle, Wash.): Plans to develop an AD demonstration project that introduces the community of South Park to alternative energy production through hands-on, culturally, and linguistically relevant engagement and education opportunities.
Georgia Southern University Research and Services Foundation (Statesboro, Ga.): Plans to conduct a feasibility study to advance the understanding of how existing AD capacity at pulp and paper mills can be sustainably leveraged for the treatment of food waste from university campuses.
Monterey One Water (Monterey County, Calif.): Plans to conduct a feasibility study to evaluate the conversion of existing anaerobic digesters at its wastewater treatment facility to co-digest sewage sludge with food and other organic wastes diverted from the area.
Northeast Waste Management Officials’ Association (NEWMOA) (Boston, Mass.): Plans to develop environmental justice engagement and regulatory compliance guidance and training to support states seeking to increase food waste diversion rates through AD utilization.
Ohio University (Athens County, Ohio): Plans to study and quantify the potential for waste diversion at microbrewery brewpub businesses and demonstrate an AD model system scaled for that sector.
San Luis Valley Local Foods Coalition (Mosca, Colo.): Plans to install a high-efficiency AD system to process food and organic waste that will demonstrate the technological feasibility and cost effectiveness of such a project in Colorado’s rural, high-alpine San Luis Valley region.
University of Iowa (Iowa City, Iowa): Plans to conduct a project that will use computational modeling to demonstrate optimum conditions for biogas production while minimizing digester issues.
University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus (Cataño, Puerto Rico): Plans to conduct a project to empower and educate the local community in utilizing AD for organic material management through a seminar series and small pilot facility to demonstrate benefits.
University of Vermont (Burlington, Vt.): Plans to perform a study to assess current capacity at digesters to accept food wastes; the potential impacts of food waste co-digestion on biogas production; and the potential impacts of co-digestion on nutrients and microplastics in digestate.
Yurok Tribe (Klamath, Calif.): Plans to establish an AD pilot demonstration project to divert the food waste generated on and near the Yurok Indian Reservation, beginning with a local elementary school.
EPA will make the awards once all legal and administrative requirements are satisfied.

For this year’s grant competition, EPA evaluated applicants on how their projects addressed numerous factors resulting from industrial, governmental, commercial, and/or other actions: human health, environmental, social, climate-related, and other cumulative impacts, and accompanying economic challenges of such impacts.

Background

In 2019 and 2020, EPA awarded a total of  more than $110,000  and more than $3 million in cooperative agreement grants, respectively. The project types selected for funding include feasibility studies, demonstration projects, workshops, as well as technical assistance and training.

 Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced a new effort under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) to streamline the review of new chemicals that could be used to displace current, higher greenhouse gas emitting transportation fuels.

Through this effort, the Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention’s (OCSPP) New Chemicals Division (NCD) has implemented a robust, consistent, and efficient process to assess the risk and apply mitigation measures, as appropriate, for substitutes to petroleum-based fuels and fuel additives that use biobased or waste-derived sources to produce biofuels. This effort supports the goals under EPA’s Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) program, which has Congressional mandates to replace or reduce quantity of petroleum-based transportation fuel, heat oil, or jet fuel with biofuels that are projected to have lower lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions. This effort also supports EPA’s 2021 Climate Adaptation Action Plan which describes steps the agency will take to address the impacts of climate change on communities across the country, as part of the Biden-Harris Administration’s actions to confront the climate crisis.

“Tackling our nation’s climate crisis is a comprehensive and collaborative effort across all of EPA,” said Assistant Administrator for the Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention Michal Freedhoff. “Using sound science to streamline the review of more environmentally friendly chemical substitutes will help advance the Agency’s climate goals and protect human health and the environment.”

EPA has received over 30 biofuel premanufacture notices (PMNs) that collectively describe plans for close to 800 million gallons per year of production of advanced biofuels, that could contribute to annual volume mandates under the RFS program and help support the goals of energy security through increasing domestic production within the US

Today’s announcement includes:

New Chemicals Division Integrated Approach to Biofuels

Under this effort, NCD formed a dedicated team to collaborate on the review of premanufacture notices (PMNs) for biobased or waste-derived feedstocks used to make transportation fuel substitutes with the goals to use the best available science while creating a consistent and efficient review process.  NCD has developed a standardized process for the way biofuel PMNs are reviewed. For example, the same dedicated team will be conducting reviews for all biofuels PMNs, which will help ensure the assessments and determinations are consistent and aligned with requirements. Further, NCD will generate one report for biofuels PMNs that combines the six different risk assessments typically conducted for PMNs, which will help provide a clearer summary explanation of how EPA conducted its assessment and made its determination.

For risk management actions, NCD will apply appropriate mitigation measures to address any potential for unreasonable risk identified in an efficient and consistent manner within TSCA consent orders and significant new use rules (SNURs).

Outreach and Training

OCSPP is launching outreach and training for interested stakeholders in the biofuels sector to review TSCA requirements, outline the streamlined approaches for risk assessments and risk management actions, and provide information on how to navigate the new chemicals PMN process.

OCSPP is holding a kick-off meeting on February 9, 2022, to provide an overview of this initiative and answer questions from stakeholders. Register for the meeting.

Other planned outreach and training related to this biofuels initiative includes webinars on:

TSCA requirements and the PMN process;
the TSCA Inventory, nomenclature, and Bona Fide process;
new chemicals risk assessments, including applications of the tools, models, and databases; and
new chemicals risk management actions, including TSCA section 5 orders and SNURs.
Additional outreach and training sessions, including training opportunities applicable to all new chemical submitters, may be added based on stakeholder interest and feedback.

In 2021, under the new leadership of the Biden-Harris Administration and Administrator Michael S. Regan, the US Environmental Protection Agency took significant steps forward in tackling the climate crisis, advancing environmental justice, protecting the health and safety of communities across the country, and restoring scientific integrity.

“Thanks to the EPA workforce’s ambition, world class expertise, and dedication, this agency has taken bold action to protect future generations from climate impacts, advance environmental justice, and build healthier, more equitable communities,” said Administrator Michael S. Regan. “I am so grateful for what we’ve accomplished together, and I’m looking forward to the big things we’ll achieve in 2022 and beyond.”

In 2021, Administrator Regan traveled to communities in 18 states, nine of EPA’s 10 regions, and three countries, where he met with local residents, key stakeholders, and elected leaders to advance the Biden-Harris Administration’s ambitious environmental agenda. Administrator Regan and agency officials also signed more than 50 rules. The agency is also delivering a historic $60 billion investment from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law in safe and healthy water, pollution cleanup and community revitalization, and healthier school buses for children.

Highlights of EPA’s 2021 accomplishments include:

Tackling the Climate Crisis

Issuing the most ambitious federal greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions standards for passenger cars and light trucks ever. (LINK)
Finalizing action to establish a comprehensive program to dramatically cut the production and consumption of climate-damaging hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) in the United States. (LINK)
Proposing comprehensive new protections to sharply reduce pollution from the oil and natural gas industry – including, for the first time, reductions from existing sources nationwide. (LINK)
Advancing Environmental Justice

Directing all EPA offices to clearly integrate environmental justice considerations into their plans and actions. (LINK)
Announcing $100 million in American Rescue Plan funding for environmental justice initiatives and air monitoring in overburdened communities. (LINK, LINK).
Embarking on a first of its kind “Journey to Justice” tour, traveling the Southeast to spotlight longstanding environmental justice concerns in historically marginalized communities and hear firsthand from residents dealing with the impacts of pollution. (LINK)
Leveraging enforcement authority to protect overburdened communities from pollution. (LINK)
Protecting the Health and Safety of Communities

Issuing a comprehensive Strategic Roadmap to confront PFAS contamination nationwide and taking significant additional actions including launching a national PFAS testing strategy, restarting a rule development process for designating PFOA and PFOS as CERCLA hazardous substances, and working toward setting a national primary drinking water standard for PFOA and PFOS. (LINK)
Announcing a $1 billion investment from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to initiate cleanup and clear the backlog of 49 previously unfunded Superfund sites and accelerate cleanup at dozens of other sites across the country. (LINK)
Reinitiating the Clean Water Act Section 404(c) process which, if finalized, would afford long term protection for Bristol Bay in Alaska. (LINK)
Stopping the use of the pesticide chlorpyrifos on all food to better protect human health, particularly that of children and farmworkers. (LINK)
Restoring Scientific Integrity

Issuing agency-wide guidance reaffirming scientific integrity as a core value at EPA and outlining concrete steps to reinforce the agency’s commitment to science. (LINK)
Resetting the Scientific Advisory Board and Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee to help ensure that EPA receives the best possible scientific insight to support our work to protect human health and the environment, and selecting the most diverse membership since the committees were established. (LINK, LINK, LINK)
Relaunching the agency’s climate change website and climate indicators report after a four-year absence during the prior administration. (LINK, LINK)

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) released its Climate Adaptation Action Plan, which describes steps EPA will take to address the impacts of climate change on communities across the Nation, as part of President Joe Biden’s whole-of-government approach to confronting the climate crisis. EPA also launched a new Climate Adaptation web page that will act as a hub for climate adaptation resources from across EPA.

“This plan is an integral part of EPA’s commitment to bold and decisive action to help the country anticipate, prepare for, adapt to, and recover from the devastating impacts of climate change,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “From fires in the West, to widespread drought, and the wide path of destruction left by Hurricane Ida from Louisiana to New York, recent and current events show the impact our changing climate is having on our lives and livelihoods.”

Pursuant to President Biden’s Executive Order 14008, EPA’s approach to tackling the climate crisis is an important step in mitigating the effects of climate change. The 2021 Climate Adaptation Action Plan lays out several priorities for the agency to implement in the coming months and years, including:

Integrating climate adaptation and consideration of climate impacts into EPA programs, policies, rulemaking processes, and enforcement activities;
Consulting and partnering with Tribes; state, local, and territorial governments, and other federal agencies; community groups; scientists and adaptation experts; businesses; and other stakeholders to increase the resilience of the nation, with a particular focus on advancing environmental justice; and
Implementing measures to protect the agency’s workforce, facilities, critical infrastructure, supply chains, and procurement processes from the risks posed by climate change.
The Biden-Harris Administration has set the most ambitious climate change mitigation and adaptation goals in US history, and EPA will play a central role in delivering on those commitments. EPA has already taken action to reduce climate pollution and will continue to implement the agenda in the months to come. At the same time, EPA will use its authorities and resources to help communities prepare for the serious climate impacts that are already underway.

Climate disruption often hits overburdened communities and people the hardest. As EPA implements this action plan, it will consider the disproportionate impacts of climate change on those who are already vulnerable, including low-income communities and communities of color, children, the elderly, Tribes, and Indigenous people. EPA will engage with underserved and vulnerable communities to ensure that our adaptation plans follow the principles of environmental justice and equity.

Anticipating and recovering from the impacts of climate change will require all levels of government to work together. EPA’s climate adaptation strategies will be informed by the best available science and will deliver co-benefits for mitigation of GHG and other pollution, public health, economic growth and job creation, national security, and environmental justice—all of which will be central to building a more resilient future.

In addition to these plans, President Biden’s Build Back Better Agenda and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Deal include bold, historic, and transformational investments to strengthen our nation’s resilience to climate change and extreme weather events, including upgrading power infrastructure, rebuilding America’s roads and bridges, and more.

The White House Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) and Office of Management and Budget seek public input on all agency climate adaptation plans. Members of the public may submit comments via the docket at https://www.regulations.gov/ (Docket ID: CEQ–2021–0003) until Nov. 6, 2021. CEQ also will hold a virtual convening this fall with national organizations who have expertise in climate adaptation and resilience or have expressed interest in agency plans.

Today, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued a final rule establishing a comprehensive program to cap and phase down the production and consumption of climate-damaging hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) in the United States. HFCs are potent greenhouse gases commonly used in refrigeration and air conditioning equipment, as well as foams and many other applications. A global phasedown of HFCs is expected to avoid up to 0.5 °C of global warming by 2100. This final rule will phase down the US production and consumption of HFCs by 85% over the next 15 years, as mandated by the American Innovation and Manufacturing (AIM) Act that was enacted in December 2020.

In addition to implementing this landmark phasedown program, the Biden-Harris Administration is marshalling a whole-of-government approach to prevent the illegal trade, production, use or sale of HFCs; support the transition to HFC alternatives through research and purchasing; and encourage the reclamation and recycling of HFCs from retired equipment, thus reducing further HFC production.

“Today EPA is taking a significant step forward to advance President Biden’s bold agenda to tackle the climate crisis,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “Cutting these climate ‘super pollutants’ protects our environment, strengthens our economy, and demonstrates that America is back when it comes to leading the world in addressing climate change and curbing global warming in the years ahead.”

AIM Act to Foster American Innovation as Phasedown Begins

The AIM Act is among the most significant environmental laws enacted by the US Congress in recent years – co-sponsored and passed with strong, bipartisan support. Backed by a broad coalition of industry and environmental groups, the law not only phases down HFCs, but it also ushers in the use of more climate friendly and energy efficient alternatives that will save consumers money while protecting the environment. American companies are at the forefront of developing HFC alternatives and the technologies that use them, and the AIM Act provides these companies additional opportunities to continue to innovate.

Saving Money, Reducing Emissions

EPA estimates that the present value of the cumulative net benefits of this action is more than $272 billion from 2022 through 2050, and that the rule will yield cumulative compliance savings for industry. In 2036 alone, the year the final reduction step is made, this rule is expected to prevent emissions of the equivalent of 171 million metric tons of carbon dioxide (CO2) – roughly equal to the annual greenhouse gas emissions from one out of every seven passenger vehicles registered in the United States. The total emission reductions of the rule from 2022 to 2050 are projected to amount to the equivalent of 4.6 billion metric tons of CO2 – nearly equal to three years of US power sector emissions at 2019 levels.

As extremely powerful greenhouse gases, HFCs accelerate climate change, which threatens society with costly health and environmental impacts such as floods, wildfires, drought, and increasingly severe weather events.  EPA conducted an environmental justice analysis that determined overall reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from this rule would benefit populations that may be especially vulnerable to damages associated with climate change, such as the very young, elderly, low-income, disabled, and indigenous populations.

Interagency Task Force to Prevent Illegal HFCs

To help ensure the integrity of the program and a rigorous and timely phasedown, EPA will work with the Department of Homeland Security to prevent the illegal import and trade of HFCs through an interagency task force. The task force will be led by experts from US Customs and Border Protection, US Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Homeland Security Investigations and EPA to detect, deter, and disrupt any attempt to illegally import HFCs into the United States.  This coordination builds on and is informed by the agencies’ long experience collaborating to prevent illegal imports, including imports of ozone-depleting substances and vehicles that fail to comply with Clean Air Act standards.

Broad Coalition Backs Super Pollutant Phasedown

The phasedown rule and whole-of-government approach have received support from a broad coalition of stakeholders, including environmental groups, industry leaders, Members of Congress, and state and local partners across the country.

“Today marks an important leap forward in our efforts to tackle the climate crisis and kick start our economy. Putting the AIM Act into action will create good-paying jobs for the American people and help position our nation for a brighter future. This is a slam dunk, plain and simple: phasing down HFCs will support American leadership in manufacturing and innovation, bring down global temperatures, strengthen our economy, and help save our planet,” said Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works Chairman Tom Carper.

“For years, critics have claimed that acting on climate would weaken our economic growth. Today’s announcement is proof positive that they were wrong. I was proud to author the bipartisan American Innovation and Manufacturing Leadership (AIM) Act in the House to tap into the powerful opportunity for growth that a US-led transition away from HFCs could bring,” said Congressman Paul Tonko, Chairman of the Energy & Commerce Subcommittee on Environment and Climate Change. “This legislation and today’s rule position US manufacturers as worldwide leaders in the green economy of the future while also being the most significant action taken by Congress to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in a decade. Simply put, it’s a win-win. I want to thank Administrator Regan and the EPA staff for prioritizing this rulemaking to get the AIM Act up and running. My colleagues and I stand ready to help ensure the successful implementation of this critical climate legislation.”

“The Biden Administration’s action today is a critical step in our ongoing efforts to combat the catastrophic climate crisis by phasing down hydrofluorocarbons, an extremely potent greenhouse gas,” said House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Frank Pallone, Jr.  “Congress took a major step in passing the AIM Act in the end-of-year omnibus package last year. I’m very pleased with the Biden Administration’s robust implementation of the law, and the whole-of-government approach it is taking to lead the global transition to cleaner alternatives.”

“The US Climate Alliance welcomes the EPA’s finalization of this rule to phase down highly-potent HFCs across the country. National standards will ensure all communities have access to higher quality products, and that we are giving US industry the best opportunity to innovate and lead the global transition to HFC alternatives,” said US Climate Alliance Policy Director Taryn Finnessey. “Alliance states have been leading the charge in reducing HFC emissions in recent years and now have a strong federal partner in this push. It’s a win for jobs, a win for our economy and it will help us achieve our bold state and federal climate goals.”

“We have repeatedly seen how environmental crime can fundamentally undermine the best efforts to protect our climate," said Avipsa Mahapatra, Climate Campaign Lead at the Environmental Investigation Agency. "This is a groundbreaking effort to fight crime in climate pollutants by combining the latest technology with the broad cooperation necessary to deliver on US climate goals.”

“This rule is the critical first milestone in the implementation of the AIM Act, which became law in December 2020. We applaud the EPA and the entire Biden Administration for its effort to meet the first statutory deadline for its promulgation,” said Karen Meyers, Chairman of the Board for the Alliance for Responsible Atmospheric Policy and Vice President of Rheem Manufacturing.

“We look forward to reviewing the final allocation rule in full detail and working with EPA to achieve a smooth phasedown as it also initiates efforts on user sector rules and refrigerant management,” said Kevin Fay, Executive Director for the Alliance for Responsible Atmospheric Policy.

“AHRI and its member manufacturers that produce and use hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) refrigerants are pleased that the EPA finalized the allocation rule on time, as required by the American Innovation and Manufacturing Act.  Predictability is a very important aspect of the manufacturing process, and this timely rule ensures that our member companies are aware of this regulatory terrain for the coming years,” said Air-Conditioning, Heating & Refrigeration Institute President & CEO Stephen Yurek. “This rule is a critical step in the 15-year industry-supported process of phasing down HFCs and represents a win for both the climate and the American economy.   We are hopeful that the administration will soon submit the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol – the treaty that underpins the AIM Act – to the United States Senate and continue the process of putting the United States on record with the majority of the world’s nations in support of this global phase down.”

The HFC Allocation final rule establishes the HFC production and consumption baseline levels from which reductions will be made, establishes an initial methodology for allocating HFC allowances for 2022 and 2023, and creates a robust, agile, and innovative compliance and enforcement system. EPA intends to use the approach established through this rulemaking to issue allowances for 2022 by October 1, 2021 and plans to revisit the approach for subsequent years in a later rulemaking. In addition to establishing a general HFC allowance pool and a set aside pool (e.g., for new market entrants), the rule outlines how EPA is issuing allowances for specific applications listed in the AIM Act that the agency was directed to provide allowances for, such as mission-critical military applications.

September is National Preparedness Month, and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is encouraging individuals, businesses, and communities to take action by following health and safety tips to mitigate the impacts of natural disasters. Emergency preparedness is especially important as the west coast responds to wildfires, the midwest recovers from historic flooding and communities on the Gulf Coast and the East Coast continue to respond and recover from the impacts of Hurricane Ida.

In addition to taking short-term actions to prepare for the impacts of natural disasters, many communities and municipalities across the country are planning ahead by engaging in sustainability and resiliency planning. Supporting emergency preparedness is one of the many ways that the Agency protects human health and the environment.

“From wildfires on the west, to Hurricane Ida, to flooding in the Midwest, climate change is increasing the frequency of extreme weather events, which means an increased need for preparedness,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “As an agency, it is our duty to ensure we are helping others disproportionately impacted by these impacts, especially those living in underserved communities. Providing the public with information to prepare and plan for environmental emergencies reduces health and safety risks for individuals and their families.”

Based on scientific data and historical patterns, it is projected that the effects of climate change will continue to increase the frequency of natural disasters such as hurricanes and wildfires. Vulnerable communities have an increased risk from the impacts of climate change and the effects associated with natural disasters. EPA continues to work with vulnerable communities to ensure equal access to the decision-making processes related to emergency preparedness.

Individuals, businesses, and communities can use the following tips to prepare for environmental emergencies and disasters:

Review EPA’s tips for general emergency preparedness
Access EPA’s resources for creating healthy, sustainable, and equitable communities
Follow the Center for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) guidance related to COVID-19 health and safety
Access available resources for emergency preparedness at ready.gov
Use the emergency preparedness resources available from your state, local, and/or tribal community
The EPA has an active role in preparedness, prevention, response, and recovery related to oil spills; chemical, biological, radiological releases; and natural disasters. In addition to working with other federal agencies to provide emergency response support, the Agency provides assistance to states, local governments, and Tribes when additional resources are needed or have been exhausted.

For more information on National Preparedness Month, visit: https://www.epa.gov/natural-disasters/september-preparedness-month.

For more information on climate change’s impacts on hurricanes, visit: https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-tropical-cyclone-activity.

For more information on climate change’s impacts on wildfires, visit: https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-wildfires.

For more information on environmental justice, visit: https://www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice.

A new EPA analysis released today shows that the most severe harms from climate change fall disproportionately upon underserved communities who are least able to prepare for, and recover from, heat waves, poor air quality, flooding, and other impacts.  EPA’s analysis indicates that racial and ethnic minority communities are particularly vulnerable to the greatest impacts of climate change. Climate Change and Social Vulnerability in the United States: A Focus on Six Impact Sectors is one of the most advanced environmental justice studies to date that looks at how projected climate change impacts may be distributed across the American public.

“The impacts of climate change that we are feeling today, from extreme heat to flooding to severe storms, are expected to get worse, and people least able to prepare and cope are disproportionately exposed,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan “This report punctuates the urgency of equitable action on climate change. With this level of science and data, we can more effectively center EPA’s mission on achieving environmental justice for all.”

EPA’s new, peer-reviewed report shows the degree to which four socially vulnerable populations— defined based on income, educational attainment, race and ethnicity, and age—may be more exposed to the highest impacts of climate change. The report quantifies six types of impacts, including those to health from changes in air quality and extreme temperature, disruptions to weather-exposed workers, and flooding threats to property.

Key findings of the report include:

That Black and African American individuals are projected to face higher impacts of climate change for all six impacts analyzed in this report, compared to all other demographic groups. For example, with 2°C (3.6°F) of global warming, Black and African American individuals are:
34% more likely to currently live in areas with the highest projected increases in childhood asthma diagnoses. This rises to 41% under 4°C (7.2°F) of global warming.
40% more likely to currently live in areas with the highest projected increases in extreme temperature related deaths. This rises to 59% under 4°C of global warming.
That Hispanics and Latinos have high participation in weather-exposed industries, such as construction and agriculture, which are especially vulnerable to the effects of extreme temperatures. With 2°C (3.6°F) of global warming, Hispanic and Latino individuals are 43% more likely to currently live in areas with the highest projected reductions in labor hours due to extreme temperatures. With regards to transportation, Hispanic and Latino individuals are about 50% more likely to currently live in areas with the highest estimated increases in traffic delays due to increases in coastal flooding.
This significant study represents an important milestone in understanding the future impacts of climate change on different American populations, especially under resourced communities. Due to data and modeling limitations, this study is limited to the contiguous US Future work will enhance both the coverage of other important areas, such as Hawaii and Alaska, and will explore additional impact sectors and measures of social vulnerability.

Today’s analysis will help further efforts being taken by the Biden Administration across the Federal government to advance environmental justice and to address the disproportionate impacts that climate change is having on vulnerable communities. During his first weeks in office, President Biden issued Executive Order 14008 on Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad, which established the first-ever White House Environmental Justice Advisory Council, the White House Environmental Justice Interagency Council, and the Justice40 Initiative. Through the Justice40 Initiative, the Federal government is, for the first time in history, working to ensure that at least 40-percent of climate and clean energy investment benefits flow to disadvantaged communities.

As part of President Biden’s commitments to multilateralism and action on the climate crisis, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Administrator Michael S. Regan,  together with Special Presidential Envoy for Climate John Kerry, wrapped up substantial discussions with G7 Climate and Environment Ministers today, hosted virtually by the United Kingdom.  Building on President Biden’s Earth Day Leaders Summit on Climate, the G7 Ministers committed to a series of actions to reduce greenhouse gas pollution that also support economic opportunities and advance environmental justice.

“I’m proud to endorse the G7 Climate and Environment Ministers Statement, which includes concrete steps to combat the urgent threat of the climate crisis while lifting up vulnerable communities across the world,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “Our actions to address food waste and loss are reducing hunger in the United States while also reducing climate pollution. This is one of many ways the US will continue to lead on today’s critical environmental challenges, while reaching out and sharing best practices with countries around the world.”

The G7 Alliance on Resource Efficiency Food Loss and Waste Case Studies provide guidance and best practices for reducing lost and wasted food which account for an estimated 8% of global greenhouse gas emissions at a time of increasing food insecurity in the US and globally.

In endorsing the Ocean Navigation Plan, the United States and our G7 partners reinforced that the need to conserve our oceans has never been more urgent, and that our decisions will be led by science.  The Ocean Navigation Plan will guide scientific cooperation on ocean science as our oceans warm due to climate change.

The G7 Climate and Environment Ministers also established an expert group, supported by the International Community of Zoonosis, which will bring together the world’s scientific leaders in zoonotic and emerging diseases, biodiversity loss, health, environment, and food safety to improve the global response to COVID-19 and zoonotic diseases.

Administrator Regan will meet again in July with Environment Ministers during the G20 Climate and Environment Ministers meeting hosted by Italy.

The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is proposing its first rule under the American Innovation and Manufacturing (AIM) Act of 2020 to phase down the production and consumption of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), highly potent greenhouse gases commonly used in refrigerators, air conditioners, and many other applications. The AIM Act directs EPA to sharply reduce production and consumption of these harmful pollutants by using an allowance allocation and trading program. This phasedown will decrease the production and import of HFCs in the United States by 85% over the next 15 years. A global HFC phasedown is expected to avoid up to 0.5 °C of global warming by 2100.

“With this proposal, EPA is taking another significant step under President Biden’s ambitious agenda to address the climate crisis,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “By phasing down HFCs, which can be hundreds to thousands of times more powerful than carbon dioxide at warming the planet, EPA is taking a major action to help keep global temperature rise in check. The phasedown of HFCs is also widely supported by the business community, as it will help promote American leadership in innovation and manufacturing of new climate-safe products. Put simply, this action is good for our planet and our economy.”

“By phasing down hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), which are powerful greenhouse gases, implementation of the AIM Act will create hundreds of thousands of good paying jobs that will combat climate change, said Sen. Thomas Carper (D-DE), Chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee. “In joining the rest of the world in reducing the use of HFCs, we will help avoid an increase of 0.5°C of global warming by the end of the century. Passing the AIM Act was a momentous climate achievement that will help save our planet, and today we are one step closer to its benefits being a reality.”

“The AIM Act is one of the most significant environmental policy laws passed in recent years. This HFC allocation rule is key to achieving an orderly HFC phasedown in the United States, creating a uniform federal approach to this effort, and capturing significant projected environmental and economic benefits,” said Karen Meyers, Vice President of the Rheem Manufacturing Company, and Chairman of the Alliance for Responsible Atmospheric Policy. “Alliance member companies look forward to working with EPA on rapid completion of this first AIM Act rule, as well as moving to next generation compounds and user technologies and improving refrigerant management.”

“The US Climate Alliance welcomes this next step from EPA to phase down highly potent HFCs across the country. National standards will ensure all communities have access to higher quality products, and that we are giving US industry the best opportunity to innovate and lead the global transition to HFC alternatives,” said US Climate Alliance Executive Director Julie Cerqueira. “Alliance states have been leading the charge in reducing HFC emissions in recent years and now have a strong federal partner in this push. It’s a win for jobs, a win for our economy and it will help us achieve our bold state and federal climate goals.”

The AIM Act is among the most significant environmental laws from the US Congress in recent years – co-sponsored and passed with strong, bipartisan support. Backed by a broad coalition of industry and environmental groups, it provides regulatory certainty across the United States for phasing down HFCs and ushers in the use of more climate friendly and efficient alternatives that will save consumers money while improving the environment. American companies are at the forefront of developing HFC alternatives and the technologies that use them, and the AIM Act allows these companies to continue to lead and innovate internationally.

Phasing down HFCs in favor of environmentally safer alternatives and more energy-efficient cooling technologies is expected to save billions of dollars and better protect Americans’ health and the environment.

HFCs are extremely powerful greenhouse gases that accelerate climate change, which threatens society with costly health and environmental impacts such as floods, wildfires, drought, and increasingly severe weather events. EPA estimates that the present value of the cumulative benefits of this action is $283.9 billion from 2022 through 2050, and that the proposal will yield cumulative compliance savings for industry. In 2036 alone, the year the final reduction step is made, this rule is expected to prevent the equivalent of 187 million metric tons of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions – roughly equal to the annual greenhouse gas emissions from one out of every seven vehicles registered in the United States. The total emission reductions of the proposal from 2022 to 2050 are projected to amount to the equivalent of 4.7 billion metric tons of CO2 – nearly equal to three years of US power sector emissions at 2019 levels.

EPA conducted an environmental justice analysis that determined overall reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from this rule would benefit populations that may be especially vulnerable to damages associated with climate change, such as the very young, elderly, poor, disabled, and indigenous populations. As the proposal moves forward, EPA will further consider the impacts on at-risk communities.

EPA’s proposal would set the HFC production and consumption baseline levels from which reductions will be made, establish an initial methodology for allocating HFC allowances for 2022 and 2023, and create a robust, agile, and innovative compliance and enforcement system. EPA intends to use the approach established through this rulemaking to issue allowances for 2022 by October 1, 2021 and plans to revisit the approach for subsequent years in a later rulemaking. In addition to proposing to establish a general HFC allowance pool and a set aside pool (e.g., for new market entrants), the proposal outlines how EPA plans to issue allowances for specific applications listed in the AIM Act that the agency was directed to provide allowances for, such as mission-critical military applications.

EPA will accept comments on this proposal for 45 days after publication in the Federal Register and hold a public hearing. The agency plans to finalize this rule later this year.

For more information on the rule and how to comment, please visit: https://www.epa.gov/climate-hfcs-reduction

Background
The AIM Act, which was included in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, provides EPA new authorities to address HFCs in three main areas: phasing down the production and consumption of listed HFCs, maximizing reclamation and minimizing releases of these HFCs and their substitutes in equipment (e.g., refrigerators and air conditioners), and facilitating the transition to next-generation technologies by restricting the use of HFCs in particular sectors or subsectors. Under this third authority, EPA recently received five petitions from industry, states, and environmental organizations to address HFC use in refrigeration, air conditioning, and other applications.

The AIM Act’s phasedown is consistent with the global phasedown of HFCs outlined in the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, an international agreement ratified by more than 115 countries.

This proposal is the first to provide an estimate of the social costs of HFCs, or the monetized benefits from a decrease in emissions of HFCs, corresponding reductions in global warming, and the avoided damages. In April, EPA finalized a rulemaking under the Significant New Alternatives Policy (SNAP) program that listed new refrigerant options for use in retail food refrigeration, residential and light commercial air conditioning, and heat pump equipment. These additional options have lower global warming potentials and provide additional flexibility for industry, supporting the transition to alternatives needed to meet the AIM Act’s HFC phasedown reduction steps. More information:  https://www.epa.gov/snap

On April 22, as a part of the Paris Agreement, the United States pledged to reduce national greenhouse gas emissions by 50 to 52 percent below 2005 levels by 2030. Due to the significant reduction of highly potent HFCs, this proposed rulemaking is an important step toward meeting that commitment.

Today, in conjunction with President Biden's Leaders Summit on Climate, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Administrator Michael S. Regan announced three significant initiatives to support community-driven solutions in North America and in many countries around the world. Through cooperation and partnership, the United States can catalyze meaningful international climate action to reduce greenhouse gas pollution while also unleashing economic opportunities, creating good jobs, and advancing environmental justice.

“The climate crisis is an urgent threat and President Biden has set forth an ambitious commitment to confront it. EPA will be at the center of delivering on this agenda, and in doing so, we are lifting up overburdened communities while creating new jobs and building a 21st Century clean economy,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “The Leaders Summit is a statement that the United States is once again a global climate leader. America is back, and we are committed to empowering the people who’ve been left out of the conversation for too long – the same communities who are on the frontlines of pollution, who suffer disproportionately from the impacts of climate change.”

In the spirit of partnership, the EPA is proud to announce that we will resume and strengthen our commitment to the United Nations Foundation's Clean Cooking Alliance. The US government will work with the Clean Cooking Alliance, other country governments, and partners at every level of government to reduce emissions from home cooking and heating that contribute to climate change and directly affect the health and livelihoods of almost 40 percent of the world’s population.

In addition to cookstoves, EPA is also pleased to announce the Black Carbon Health Assessment in Indigenous Arctic Communities project to be implemented by the Aleut International Association. Indigenous Arctic communities are on the front lines of climate change, and this project will provide needed tools to understand their exposure to black carbon emissions, to help Indigenous communities identify significant local sources, and to share best practices for preventing and mitigating the health impacts of air pollution and climate. EPA is already reaching out through the Arctic Council to work with fellow arctic governments to support and grow this project.

And with our North American partners in Canada and Mexico, EPA will support an initial allocation of $1 million for an Environmental Justice and Climate Resilience Initiative. Through the North American Commission on Environmental Cooperation (CEC), this initiative will support underserved and vulnerable communities, including Indigenous communities in Canada, Mexico, and the United States, helping to build resilience in the face climate-related impacts.

These announcements support President Biden’s Climate Leaders Summit, which underscores the urgency – and the economic benefits – of stronger climate action. The US is demonstrating America’s leadership and commitment to tackling the climate crisis and rallying the rest of the world. The health of our communities, well-being of our workers, and competitiveness of our economy requires quick and bold action.

This moment requires unpreceded global cooperation, and a shared sense of urgency and commitment. The Leaders Summit is the first stop on the road to Glasgow.

As part of the Biden-Harris Administration's commitment to action on climate change and restoring science, EPA is taking the first step in a relaunch of its climate change website. For the first time in four years, EPA now has a webpage to guide the public to a range of information, including greenhouse gas emissions data, climate change impacts, scientific reports, and existing climate programs within EPA and across the federal government.

"Climate facts are back on EPA's website where they should be," said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. "Considering the urgency of this crisis, it's critical that Americans have access to information and resources so that we can all play a role in protecting our environment, our health, and vulnerable communities. Trustworthy, science-based information is at the foundation of strong, achievable solutions."
The Biden-Harris Administration has made it clear that addressing climate change is a national priority. In the weeks and months to come, EPA will be adding new, updated information on climate change science, impacts, what EPA is doing and what you can do, providing a trustworthy, accurate public resource on climate change issues and solutions.

Climate change leads to rising seas, retreating snow and ice, and to changes in the frequency and intensity of heat waves, precipitation, and extreme weather events. These changes, occurring as a result of the buildup of greenhouse gases due to human activities, are changing the climate at a pace and in a way that threatens human health, society, and the natural environment. Children, the elderly, and the poor are among the most vulnerable to climate-related health effects.

Today, May 8, 2024, in response to President Biden’s Executive Order 14081, “Advancing Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing Innovation for a Sustainable, Safe, and Secure American Bioeconomy,” the US Environmental Protection Agency, the US Food and Drug Administration and the US Department of Agriculture have developed a plan to update, streamline and clarify their regulations and oversight mechanisms for products of biotechnology.

The plan helps meet the President’s goals of ensuring public confidence in the biotechnology regulatory system and improving its transparency, predictability, coordination and efficiency. Through engagement with developers and stakeholders, as well as horizon scanning for novel biotechnology products, the agencies worked collaboratively to develop a cohesive plan. The plan incorporates processes and timelines to implement regulatory reform, such as identifying guidance and regulations to update, streamline, or clarify, and identifying the potential need for new guidance or regulations. The plan supports a whole-of-government approach to the regulation of biotechnology products.

The agencies have identified five major areas of biotechnology product regulation where these actions will focus:

Modified plants
Modified animals
Modified microorganisms
Human drugs, biologics and medical devices
Cross-cutting issues
EPA, the FDA and USDA intend to implement the following joint efforts:

Clarify and streamline regulatory oversight for genetically engineered plants, animals and microorganisms;
Update and expand their information sharing through an MOU to improve and broaden communication and coordination of oversight of modified microbes; and
Undertake a pilot project focused on modified microbes to explore and consider the feasibility and costs of developing a web-based tool that informs developers about which agency may regulate a given product category.
The federal government established the Coordinated Framework for the Regulation of Biotechnology in 1986 and most recently updated it in 2017. It describes the comprehensive federal regulatory policy for ensuring the safety of biotechnology products, including how EPA, the FDA and USDA share responsibility for regulating many of the products of biotechnology in the United States. The Executive Order directs the three agencies to improve how they implement the Coordinated Framework.

In response to the Executive Order, the three regulatory agencies, in consultation with the Office of Science and Technology Policy, issued a Request for Information to the public to solicit information on regulatory ambiguities, gaps, uncertainties or inefficiencies in the Coordinated Framework. The agencies received 88 distinct public comments, including a sign-on letter from over 6,000 members from biotechnology developers, producers, manufacturers, non-governmental organizations and academia. The agencies will continue to engage with all interested stakeholders as they implement the plan.

Today, May 7,  the US Environmental Protection Agency announced the availability of grant funding available to Tribal governments and eligible territories to implement projects aimed at reducing diesel emissions from older diesel engines. Legacy diesel engines emit large amounts of NOx and PM2.5, which contribute to serious public health problems, including asthma, lung disease, and various other cardiac and respiratory diseases. Through the 2024 Diesel Emissions Reduction Act Tribal and Territory Grants Notice of Funding Opportunity, EPA anticipates awarding approximately $9 million in total DERA funding to eligible applicants, subject to the availability of funds.

“EPA is pleased to support the air quality goals of Tribes and territories as they work to improve public health,” said EPA Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation Joseph Goffman. “Replacing older, more polluting diesel vehicles and equipment with cleaner new alternatives will reduce harmful diesel exhaust in nearby communities while supporting local economies.”

A total of $8 million will be made available to federally recognized Tribal governments, intertribal consortia, and Alaska Native Villages, and $1 million will be made available to territories, including government agencies of the US Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.

Matching funds are not required for eligibility to the program. These grants are specifically tailored to expand access to diesel emission reduction projects to those Tribes and territories with more limited resources. The DERA program has worked with Tribes to tailor the DERA Tribal competition to meet their specific needs since 2014 and opened the program to territories (formerly known as insular areas) in 2021. This allows for Tribes and territories to pursue more robust and impactful projects.

Nearly 8 million legacy diesel engines are in use in the United States and emissions from these engines are a significant source of health problems. The DERA program prioritizes projects in areas that face challenging air quality issues, especially those projects that benefit underserved communities or populations that have faced or are facing environmental health or environmental justice disparities.

Application packages must be submitted electronically to EPA through Grants.gov by Friday, December 6, at 11:59 p.m. EST to be considered for funding. Although funding for both Tribes and territories is being announced under this single Notice of Funding Opportunity, the applications for each group will be reviewed separately.

EPA will host several information sessions regarding this funding opportunity. Webinar links and dial-in information for the information sessions can be found on the Tribal and Territory Grants: Diesel Emissions Reduction Act webpage.

More than 73,700 engines, vehicles, or other pieces of equipment were replaced or retrofitted to run cleaner with DERA funds during fiscal years 2008 to 2018, according to the DERA Fifth Report to Congress.

For more information and to access the Notice of Funding Opportunity, visit the Tribal and Territory Grants: Diesel Emissions Reduction Act webpage. For general information on the DERA Program, visit the DERA Program webpage.

Today, May 6, the US Environmental Protection Agency issued a final rule to strengthen, expand, and update methane emissions reporting requirements for petroleum and natural gas systems under EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program, as required by President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act. The final revisions will ensure greater transparency and accountability for methane pollution from oil and natural gas facilities by improving the accuracy of annual emissions reporting from these operations. Oil and natural gas facilities are the nation’s largest industrial source of methane, a climate “super pollutant” that is many times more potent than carbon dioxide and is responsible for approximately one third of the warming from greenhouse gases occurring today.

EPA’s latest action complements the Biden-Harris Administration’s whole-of-government initiative to slash methane emissions from every sector of the economy under the US Methane Emissions Reduction Plan. In 2023 alone, the Administration took nearly 100 actions, with coordination by the White House Methane Task Force, to bolster methane detection and reduce methane pollution from oil and gas operations, landfills, abandoned mines, agriculture, industry, and buildings.

The final rule updating the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program is a key component of the Inflation Reduction Act’s Methane Emissions Reduction Program, as designed by Congress to help states, industry, and communities implement recently finalized Clean Air Act methane standards and slash methane emissions from the oil and gas sector. The Biden-Harris Administration is also mobilizing over $1 billion in financial and technical assistance to accelerate the transition to no- and low- emitting oil and gas technologies, as part of broad efforts to cut wasteful methane emissions.

“As we implement the historic climate programs under President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act, EPA is applying the latest tools, cutting edge technology, and expertise to track and measure methane emissions from the oil and gas industry,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “Together, a combination of strong standards, good monitoring and reporting, and historic investments to cut methane pollution will ensure the US leads in the global transition to a clean energy economy.”

Recent studies reveal that actual emissions from petroleum and natural gas systems are much greater than what has historically been reported to the GHGRP. This rule addresses that gap, including by facilitating the use of satellite data to identify super-emitters and quantify large emission events, requiring direct monitoring of key emission sources, and updating the methods for calculation. Together these changes support complete and accurate reporting and respond to Congress’s directive for the measurement of methane emissions to rely on empirical data.

Today’s announcement is EPA’s latest step in tackling methane emissions that are fueling climate change, building on the agency’s recently finalized Clean Air Act standards to sharply reduce methane and other harmful air pollutants from the oil and natural gas industry, promote the use of cutting-edge methane detection technologies, and deliver significant economic and public health benefits from methane emissions reductions. That rule established a Super-Emitter Program to help detect large leaks and releases, and today’s reporting rule will require owners and operators to quantify and report the emissions detected through that Program to help close the gap between observed methane emissions and reported emissions.

The final subpart W rule will dramatically improve the quality of emissions data reported from oil and natural gas operations, with provisions that improve the quantification of methane emissions, incorporate advances in methane emissions measurement technology, and streamline compliance with other EPA regulations. For the first time, EPA is allowing for the use of advanced technologies such as satellites to help quantify emissions in subpart W. In addition, EPA is finalizing new methodologies that allow for the use of empirical data for quantifying emissions, including options added in response to public comments on the proposed rule. The final rule also allows for the optional earlier use of empirical data calculation methodologies for facilities that prefer to use them to quantify 2024 emissions. These changes will improve transparency and expand the options for owners and operators to submit empirical data to demonstrate their effort to reduce methane emissions and identify whether a Waste Emissions Charge is owed, based on thresholds set by Congress.

Advanced measurement technologies, and their use for annual quantification of emissions, are evolving rapidly. EPA is committed to transparent and continual improvements to its programs to account for these advancements while ensuring reporting is accurate and complete. The agency intends to take the following steps to gather further information about advanced measurement technologies and to inform potential regulatory changes or other standard setting programs that encourage the use of more accurate and comprehensive measurement strategies:

This summer, EPA will solicit input on the use of advanced measurement data and methods in subpart W by issuing a Request for Information and opening a non-regulatory docket, including specific questions and topics on which EPA seeks input from the public. EPA intends to use the feedback received to consider whether it is appropriate to undertake further rulemaking addressing the use of advanced measurement technologies in subpart W, beyond the role for these technologies that is already provided in today’s rule.
EPA also seeks to continuously update its knowledge about new measurement and detection technologies, and to elicit input from stakeholders and experts about how such advances should inform EPA’s regulations. To keep pace with this dynamic field, EPA plans to undertake a solicitation or engagement for information about advanced measurement and detection technologies (in the form of a Request for Information, workshop, or similar mechanism) on at least a biennial basis. These engagements will enable EPA to learn about technological advances and the extent to which there is robust information about their accuracy, reliability, and appropriateness for use in a regulatory reporting program.
For more information about this action, please visit the GHG Reporting Program Rulemaking Resources webpage.

Background on the Methane Emissions Reduction Program in the Inflation Reduction Act

Methane is a climate “super pollutant” that is more potent than carbon dioxide and responsible for approximately one third of the warming from greenhouse gases occurring today. The oil and natural gas sector is the largest industrial source of methane emissions in the United States. Quick reduction of these methane emissions is one of the most important and cost-effective actions the United States can take in the short term to slow the rate of rapidly rising global temperatures.

EPA issued a final rule in December 2023 to sharply reduce methane emissions and other harmful air pollution from new and existing oil and gas operations.  In addition, EPA is working to implement the three-part framework of the Inflation Reduction Act’s Methane Emissions Reduction Program.

First, EPA is partnering with the US Department of Energy to utilize resources provided by Congress in the Inflation Reduction Act to provide over $1 billion dollars in financial and technical assistance to accelerate the transition to technologies that reduce methane emissions and may  include funds for activities associated with marginal (i.e., low-producing) conventional wells, support for methane monitoring, and funding to help reduce methane emissions from oil and gas operations.

Second, with today’s announcement, as directed by Congress, EPA is updating subpart W of the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program to ensure that reporting of methane emissions from oil and natural gas operations is based on empirical data and accurately reflects emissions.

Third, in January 2024 EPA proposed a rule to implement Congress’ requirement for a Waste Emissions Charge. To take advantage of near-term opportunities for methane reductions while EPA and states work toward full implementation of the final oil and gas rule, Congress directed EPA to collect a charge on methane emissions from large oil and gas facilities that are high-emitting and wasteful, based on data submitted under subpart W.

Background about Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program Requirements for Petroleum and Natural Gas Sector

The GHGRP requires reporting of greenhouse gas data and other relevant information from large GHG emission sources, fuel and industrial gas suppliers, and CO2 injection sites in the United States. Approximately 8,000 facilities are required to report their emissions annually, and the reported data are made available to the public in October of each year.

Under the GHGRP, owners or operators of facilities that contain petroleum and natural gas systems and emit 25,000 metric tons or more of GHGs per year (expressed as carbon dioxide equivalents) report GHG data to EPA. Owners or operators collect GHG data; calculate GHG emissions; and follow the specified procedures for quality assurance, missing data, recordkeeping, and reporting. Subpart W consists of emission sources in ten segments of the petroleum and natural gas industry.

Every year in May, EPA marks Asthma Awareness Month to raise national awareness of asthma and to highlight leading programs across the nation that serve as models for delivering outstanding improvements in asthma care and quality of life for people with asthma.

“Growing up with respiratory challenges in North Carolina, I know all too well the struggle that millions of Americans suffer daily. Asthma is a public health issue, an economic issue, and an environmental issue that impacts the entire country, especially low-income and minority communities,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “That’s why EPA is taking action to slash harmful pollution and raise awareness of the tools available for communities to manage asthma, control symptoms, and improve health.”

Asthma is a major public health issue that affects more than 25 million Americans, including four million children, and disproportionately affects certain racial and ethnic groups. The estimated economic impact of asthma is more than $80 billion per year from direct and indirect costs, such as missed school and workdays.

Fortunately, there are steps people can take as part of a comprehensive approach to manage their asthma, control symptoms, and improve health. These include following a personalized action plan to help manage asthma and avoiding triggers that can exacerbate symptoms.

EPA is taking action to reduce the pollution that causes asthma attacks while more communities, with EPA support, deploy approaches to improve the lives of people with asthma, especially in minority and low-income communities.

People can control asthma symptoms and improve health with three straightforward strategies:

Identify and avoid indoor environmental asthma triggers. Dust mites, secondhand smoke, mold, pests, pet dander and other allergens and contaminants in homes, schools and other indoor spaces can trigger asthma attacks. Work with your health care provider to identify and avoid your personal indoor asthma triggers.
Pay attention to outdoor air quality. Ozone and particle pollution can cause or worsen asthma attacks, even indoors. Check local air quality conditions at AirNow.gov and download the EPA AirNow app for your phone.
Create a personalized asthma action plan. This will help you monitor your or your child’s asthma and take steps to reduce exposure to personal asthma triggers. Ask a health care provider to assist you in creating a plan.
During Asthma Awareness Month, EPA recognizes leading asthma management programs for their in-home interventions through the National Environmental Leadership Award in Asthma Management. The 2024 winner is the Maine Asthma Prevention and Control Program.

Maine’s program provides leadership and coordination for asthma care and service delivery statewide. One of MAPC’s initiatives is the In-Home Asthma Education Program, an innovative, home-based asthma program for adults, children and caregivers who, despite adequate medical management, have asthma that was not well controlled. The program connects those most in need with environmental asthma remediation tools and community resources through health educators who are highly attuned to the disparities that exist in asthma management.

EPA works year-round to promote understanding of asthma triggers, as a part of comprehensive asthma management, through research, education and outreach. With support from EPA, more communities are deploying approaches to improve the lives of people with asthma, especially in minority and low-income communities. A focus of EPA’s work to reduce the scope of asthma is addressing the Indoor Environmental Determinants of Health. IEDOH are modifiable environmental factors indoors — such as household air pollution, the presence of pests, mold and moisture, chemicals and irritants — that influence risk and experience of chronic diseases, like asthma.

In addition to EPA’s work in raising asthma awareness, EPA is taking action to reduce the pollution that causes asthma attacks. In recent months, EPA has finalized strengthened pollution standards for cars, trucks, and power plants — as well as stronger air quality standards for particulate matter — that once fully implemented, are anticipated to prevent tens of thousands of cases of asthma each year and avoid millions of lost days of school and work due to asthma symptoms.

With funding from President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda, EPA is also working to improve the lives of millions of Americans by reducing pollution in neighborhoods where people live, work, play, and go to school. EPA is providing billions of dollars through the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation Reduction Act to help schools and communities purchase clean school buses and clean heavy-duty vehicles that will reduce the air pollution from older diesel engines that is linked to asthma. Phasing out these older diesel engines, which disproportionally affect communities of color and Tribal communities, will ensure cleaner air for students and communities near these transportation routes. In addition, projects developed under the Inflation Reduction Act’s Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund and the Climate Pollution Reduction Grants Program are expected to fund projects that will provide even more clean-air benefits.

Throughout May, EPA will release content on social media and its asthma website to provide additional tips and guidance to improve well-being.

Today, April 26, the US Environmental Protection Agency is wrapping up Earth Week by highlighting the work the agency is doing to prevent plastic pollution.

“Plastic waste is growing and so is the impact it has on public health and the environment,” said Cliff Villa, EPA Deputy Assistant Administrator for the Office of Land and Emergency Management. “This Earth Week, I challenge everyone to do their part to reduce plastic waste to protect our health and ensure that future generations can continue to enjoy a safe and healthy planet.”

Together, everyone can prevent plastic waste from entering the environment by reducing the waste they generate, reusing or recycling plastic products, and picking up littered materials. EPA strongly supports an innovative, equitable and circular approach to preventing plastic pollution from harming human health and the environment, particularly in already overburdened communities.

The agency’s Draft National Strategy to Prevent Plastic Pollution, together with the National Recycling Strategy, identifies actions that governments, businesses, industry, and nonprofits in the US can take to:

Reduce pollution from plastic production.
Decrease plastic waste generation by encouraging reuse.
Capture and remove plastics and other materials from the environment, including waterways and oceans.
Expand markets for recycled goods.
Improve materials management infrastructure and increase collection.
Reduce contamination in the recycled materials stream.
Recently, the 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law provided the largest EPA investment in recycling in 30 years, supporting improvements to waste management systems and programs. Just this past year in September, EPA selected 25 communities to receive grants totaling more than $73 million under the newly created Solid Waste Infrastructure for Recycling funding opportunity. In addition, EPA made available about $32 million for states and territories to improve solid waste management planning, data collection and implementation of plans.

In November, the agency announced 59 selectees to receive over $60 million in SWIFR grants for Tribes and Intertribal Consortia and 25 selectees to receive over $33 million in Recycling Education and Outreach grants. These grants will expand recycling infrastructure and education for waste management systems across the country. EPA also created a Model Recycling Program Toolkit to help communities increase participation in recycling programs and reduce contamination in the recycling stream.

Everyday ways to combat plastic pollution

Support policies and programs that aim to reduce plastic pollution.
Purchase products that are designed to be easily reusable or recyclable.
Participate in community recycling programs if they are available and learn which types of materials the local recycling program accepts.
Pick up litter in the environment and make sure it can be collected for recycling or proper disposal.
Reduce and reuse materials in everyday life. The most effective way to prevent plastic pollution is to not create plastic waste in the first place.
Additional Information on Plastic Waste

Plastic is one of the most prevalent materials in daily life—most people don’t go a single day without encountering plastic. And while it’s a valuable resource that can be put to so many uses (and reuses), it’s also a key contributor to pollution. EPA’s estimates show that plastic waste generation in the United States increased from 0.4% of total municipal solid waste generated in 1960 to 12.2% in 2018. Plastic waste that does not make it into the US waste management system often ends up in the environment as plastic pollution.

Plastic pollution is particularly concerning because plastic materials do not fully biodegrade in the environment. Land-based sources account for up to 80% of plastic waste that pollutes waterways and oceans. Plastic pollution has been found in a wide range of organisms and habitats, including coral reefs, estuaries, beaches, and the deep sea. Since plastic material does not decompose, it accumulates in landfills and in the environment. Plastic products also contribute to global greenhouse gas emissions throughout their life cycles, with most of these emissions coming from the production and conversion of fossil fuels into new plastic products. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development estimates that in 2019, plastic products were responsible for 3.4% of global greenhouse gas emissions throughout their life cycles, with 90% of these emissions coming from the production and conversion of fossil fuels into new plastic products.

Visit EPA’s webpage on plastics to learn more about plastic pollution and ways to combat it.
Visit EPA’s webpage on materials and waste to learn more.
Visit EPA’s webpage on circular economy to learn more.
Visit EPA’s webpage on Bipartisan Infrastructure Law initiatives to learn more.
Visit EPA’s Trash Free Waters program webpage to learn more.

Today, April 25, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced a suite of final rules to reduce pollution from fossil fuel-fired power plants in order to protect all communities from pollution and improve public health without disrupting the delivery of reliable electricity. These rules, finalized under separate authorities including the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, and Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, will significantly reduce climate, air, water, and land pollution from the power sector, delivering on the Biden-Harris Administration’s commitment to protect public health, advance environmental justice, and confront the climate crisis.

By announcing these final rules at the same time, EPA is following through on the commitment that Administrator Michael S. Regan made to industry stakeholders at CERAWeek 2022 to provide regulatory certainty as the power sector makes long-term investments in the transition to a clean energy economy. The standards are designed to work with the power sector’s planning processes, providing compliance timelines that enable power companies to plan in advance to meet electricity demand while reducing dangerous pollution.

“Today, EPA is proud to make good on the Biden-Harris Administration’s vision to tackle climate change and to protect all communities from pollution in our air, water, and in our neighborhoods,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “By developing these standards in a clear, transparent, inclusive manner, EPA is cutting pollution while ensuring that power companies can make smart investments and continue to deliver reliable electricity for all Americans.”

“This year, the United States is projected to build more new electric generation capacity than we have in two decades – and 96 percent of that will be clean,” said President Biden’s National Climate Advisor Ali Zaidi. “President Biden’s leadership has not only sparked an unprecedented expansion in clean electricity generation, his leadership has also launched an American manufacturing renaissance. America is now a magnet for private investment, with hundreds of billions of dollars committed and 270,000 new clean energy jobs created. This is how we win the future, by harnessing new technologies to grow our economy, deliver environmental justice, and save the planet for future generations.”

The suite of final rules includes:

A final rule for existing coal-fired and new natural gas-fired power plants that would ensure that all coal-fired plants that plan to run in the long-term and all new baseload gas-fired plants control 90 percent of their carbon pollution.
A final rule strengthening and updating the Mercury and Air Toxics Standards (MATS) for coal-fired power plants, tightening the emissions standard for toxic metals by 67 percent and finalizing a 70 percent reduction in the emissions standard for mercury from existing lignite-fired sources.
A final rule to reduce pollutants discharged through wastewater from coal-fired power plants by more than 660 million pounds per year, ensuring cleaner water for affected communities, including communities with environmental justice concerns that are disproportionately impacted.
A final rule that will require the safe management of coal ash that is placed in areas that were unregulated at the federal level until now, including at previously used disposal areas that may leak and contaminate groundwater.
Delivering Public Health Protections for Communities, Providing Regulatory Certainty for the Industry, and Ensuring the Power Sector Can Provide Reliable Electricity for Consumers

Finalizing these four rules delivers on the Administration’s commitment to providing health protections for all communities, including communities with environmental justice concerns, many of which are located near power plants. At the same time, EPA is providing a predictable regulatory outlook for power companies, including opportunities to reduce compliance complexity, and clear signals to create market and price stability. Administrator Regan outlined this approach in 2022 when he committed to transparency and open dialogue so that state and federal energy regulators, power companies, and grid operators have clear information on which to base decisions.

EPA conducted regulatory impact analyses for each rule, showing that this suite of standards will deliver hundreds of billions of dollars in net benefits. EPA also performed a sensitivity analysis exploring the combined effect on the power sector of the carbon pollution, air toxics, and water rules, as well as EPA’s recent rules for the transportation sector. The projections regarding changes in electricity supply and demand align with recent reports from the Department of Energy (DOE) and National Renewable Energy Laboratory and peer-reviewed research in showing that the sector can meet growing demand for electricity and provide reliable, affordable electricity at the same time as it reduces pollution in accordance with these rules to protect health and the planet.

With the announcement today, the power sector can make planning decisions with a full array of information. In fact, the agency’s analysis indicates that issuing these rules at the same time is likely to create more efficiency for facilities that are now able to evaluate compliance steps together rather than only for each rule in isolation. Therefore, adding the cost of the rules modeled independently would likely reflect an overestimate of total costs.

“The new rules to clean up air pollution from power plants are good news for everyone, especially if there is a power plant near where you work, live or study. The American Lung Association applauds Administrator Regan and the entire team of professionals at the EPA for their resolute commitment to public health and environmental justice,” said Harold Wimmer, President and CEO of the American Lung Association. “Burning fossil fuels in power plants harms people’s lungs, makes kids sick and accelerates the climate crisis. The stronger clean air and climate protections will save lives.”

“These rules call on utilities and states to be full partners in making this transition fair for energy workers and communities,” said BlueGreen Alliance Executive Director Jason Walsh. “It also complements the historic federal investments made by the Biden-Harris administration and the previous Congress, which provide a toolbox of critical investments targeted to the workers and communities experiencing the economic impacts of energy transition.”

Stronger Carbon Pollution Standards for New Gas and Existing Coal Power Plants

EPA’s final Clean Air Act standards for existing coal-fired and new natural gas-fired power plants limit the amount of carbon pollution covered sources can emit, based on proven and cost-effective control technologies that can be applied directly to power plants. The regulatory impact analysis projects reductions of 1.38 billion metric tons of carbon pollution overall through 2047, which is equivalent to preventing the annual emissions of 328 million gasoline cars, or to nearly an entire year of emissions from the entire US electric power sector. It also projects up to $370 billion in climate and public health net benefits over the next two decades.

The rule addresses existing coal-fired power plants, which continue to be the largest source of greenhouse gas emissions from the power sector, and ensures that new natural gas combustion turbines, some of the largest new sources of greenhouse gases being built today, are designed using modern technologies to reduce climate pollution.

The climate and health benefits of this rule substantially outweigh the compliance costs. In 2035 alone, the regulatory impact analysis estimates substantial health co-benefits including:

Up to 1,200 avoided premature deaths
870 avoided hospital and emergency room visits
1,900 avoided cases of asthma onset
360,000 avoided cases of asthma symptoms
48,000 avoided school absence days
57,000 lost workdays
The final emission standards and guidelines will achieve substantial reductions in carbon pollution at reasonable cost. The best system of emission reduction for the longest-running existing coal units and most heavily utilized new gas turbines is based on carbon capture and sequestration/storage (CCS) – an available and cost-reasonable emission control technology that can be applied directly to power plants and can reduce 90 percent of carbon dioxide emissions from the plants.

Lower costs and continued improvements in CCS technology, alongside tax incentives from President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act that allow companies to largely offset the cost of CCS, represent recent developments in emissions controls that informed EPA’s determination of what is technically feasible and cost-reasonable. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law also includes billions of dollars to advance and deploy CCS technology and infrastructure. EPA projects that the sector can comply with the standards with negligible impact on electricity prices, thanks to cost declines in CCS and other emissions-reducing technologies. EPA analysis also finds that power companies can comply with the standards while meeting grid reliability, even when considering increased load growth.

The final rule includes requirements to help ensure meaningful engagement with affected stakeholders, including communities with environmental justice concerns, overburdened by pollution and climate change impacts, as well as the energy communities and workers who have powered our nation for generations. The standard also requires states to provide transparent data on compliance pathways and timelines through the state planning process, ensuring that workers and communities have the best-available information to plan for changes in the sector. President Biden’s Interagency Working Group on Coal and Power Plant Communities and Economic Revitalization has identified historic resources for energy communities to invest in infrastructure, deploy new technologies that can help clean up the electric power sector, support energy workers, and spur long-term economic revitalization. The final rule also follows guidance from the Council on Environmental Quality to ensure that deployment of CCS technologies is done in a responsible manner that incorporates the input of communities and reflects the best available science.

In addition to finalizing these rules, EPA has opened a non-regulatory docket and issued framing questions to gather input about a comprehensive approach to reduce GHG emissions from the entire fleet of existing gas combustion turbines in the power sector. EPA is committed to expeditiously proposing GHG emission guidelines for these units, as part of a comprehensive approach to the regulation of climate, toxic and air pollution from combustion turbines.

To view the fact sheet for this rulemaking visit EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Standards and Guidelines for Fossil Fuel-Fired Power Plants webpage.

Strengthening Mercury and Air Toxics Standards

EPA is strengthening and updating the Mercury and Air Toxics Standards (MATS) for coal-fired power plants, achieving important hazardous air pollutant (HAP) emissions reductions and ensuring that the standards reflect the latest advancement in pollution control technologies. This final rule under the Clean Air Act is the most significant update since MATS was first issued in February 2012, building on highly successful and cost-effective protections.

EPA projects the final rule will reduce emissions of mercury and non-mercury metal HAPs, such as nickel, arsenic, and lead. Controlling these emissions from power plants improves public health for all Americans by reducing the risk of fatal heart attacks, cancer, developmental delays in children, and also reduces adverse environmental impacts. The final rule will also result in substantial co-benefits, including reductions in emissions of fine particulate matter (“soot”), sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and carbon dioxide nationwide. These public health improvements are especially important for children and communities with environmental justice concerns and others who regularly consume fish that accumulate high levels of pollutants from power plants.  

The final rule reduces the mercury emissions limit by 70 percent for lignite-fired units and reduces the emissions limit that controls for toxic metals by 67 percent for all coal plants—while also requiring the use of continuous emission monitoring systems to provide real-time, accurate data to regulators, facility operators, and the public to ensure that plants are meeting these lower limits and that communities are protected year-round from pollution exposure.

EPA projects that the final MATS limits will result in the following emissions reductions in the year 2028:

1,000 pounds of mercury
At least 7 tons of non-mercury HAP metals
770 tons of fine particulate matter (PM2.5)
280 tons of nitrogen oxides (NOx)
65,000 tons of carbon dioxide (CO2)
EPA’s final rule projects $300 million in health benefits and $130 million in climate benefits over the 10-year period from 2028-2037. Reductions in non-mercury HAP metal emissions are expected to reduce exposure to carcinogens such as nickel, arsenic, and hexavalent chromium, for residents living in the vicinity of these facilities.

To view the fact sheet for this rulemaking visit EPA’s Mercury and Air Toxics Standards webpage.

Stronger Limits on Water Pollution from Power Plants

EPA is strengthening wastewater discharge standards that apply to coal-fired power plants, finalizing a rule that follows the latest science and applies EPA’s longstanding authority under the Clean Water Act to reduce discharges of toxic metals and other pollutants from these power plants into lakes, streams, and other waterbodies. When implemented, this action will annually prevent more than 660 million pounds of pollution per year from being discharged to our nation’s waters—protecting freshwater resources that provide sources of drinking water for communities, support economic development, enhance outdoor recreation, and sustain vibrant ecosystems.

Power plants that burn coal to create electricity use large volumes of water. When this water is returned to lakes, streams, and other waterbodies it can carry pollutants, including mercury, arsenic, selenium, nickel, bromide, chloride, and iodide, and nutrient pollution. Exposure to these pollutants can harm people and ecosystems by contaminating drinking water sources, recreational waters, and aquatic life.

EPA’s final rule establishes technology-based discharge standards—known as Effluent Limitation Guidelines (ELGs)—that will apply to four types of wastewater:

Flue gas desulfurization wastewater
Bottom ash transport water
Combustion residual leachate
“Legacy wastewater” that is stored in surface impoundments (for example, coal ash ponds)
The agency’s final rule includes implementation flexibilities for power plants. For example, the final rule creates a new compliance path for electricity generating units that permanently stop burning coal by 2034. These units will be able to continue meeting existing requirements instead of the requirements contained in this final regulation. In a separate action finalized last year, EPA updated but maintained an existing provision allowing units to comply with less stringent standards if they will permanently stop burning coal by 2028.

Following rigorous analysis, EPA has determined that this final rule will have minimal effects on electricity prices. EPA’s analysis shows that the final rule will provide billions of dollars in health and environmental benefits each year. These water quality, health, and environmental improvements will benefit environmental justice communities that are disproportionately affected by pollution from coal-fired power plants.

To view the fact sheet for this rulemaking visit EPA’s Steam Electric Power Generating Effluent Guidelines webpage.

Latest Action to Protect Communities from Coal Ash Contamination

Under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, EPA is finalizing a rule to protect communities and hold polluters accountable for controlling and cleaning up the contamination created by the disposal of coal combustion residuals (CCR or coal ash), which can cause serious public health risks. The agency is finalizing regulations that require the safe management of coal ash at inactive surface impoundments at inactive power plants and historical coal ash disposal areas.

Coal ash is a byproduct of burning coal in power plants that, without proper management, can pollute waterways, groundwater, drinking water, and the air. Coal ash contains contaminants like mercury, cadmium, chromium, and arsenic which are associated with cancer and various other serious health effects. EPA’s final rule expands protections for the communities and ecosystems near active and inactive coal burning power plants, ensuring that groundwater contamination, surface water contamination, fugitive dust, floods and impoundment overflows, and threats to wildlife are all addressed.

Inactive coal ash surface impoundments at inactive facilities, referred to as “legacy CCR surface impoundments,” are more likely to be unlined and unmonitored, making them more prone to leaks and structural problems than units at facilities that are currently in service. To address these concerns, EPA established safeguards for legacy coal ash surface impoundments that largely mirror those for inactive impoundments at active facilities, including requiring the proper closure of the impoundments and remediating coal ash contamination in groundwater. EPA analysis shows the final rule will reduce existing disproportionate and adverse effects on communities with environmental justice concerns.

In addition, through implementation of the 2015 CCR rule, EPA found “historic” disposal units that are leaking and contaminating groundwater at currently regulated power plants, but which were exempt under the original 2015 regulations. These are areas where coal ash was placed directly on the land, such as coal ash in surface impoundments and landfills that closed prior to the effective date of the 2015 CCR Rule and inactive CCR landfills. This final rule extends a subset of EPA’s existing CCR requirements to these historic disposal units that will ensure any contamination from these areas is remediated, and will prevent further contamination. These requirements will apply to all active CCR facilities and inactive facilities with legacy CCR surface impoundments.

EPA does not expect this rule to affect the current operations of power plants, and therefore anticipates no impacts to electricity generation or grid reliability. This rule reflects the Administration’s commitment to reduce pollution from the power sector while providing long-term regulatory certainty and operational flexibility.

Today, April 24, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced the launch of the nearly $1 billion Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicles Grant Program to fund the replacement of certain polluting heavy-duty vehicles with zero-emission vehicles. Funded through the Inflation Reduction Act under President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda, EPA will award competitive grants for projects that will reduce climate and air pollution from heavy-duty vehicles, support good-paying jobs and improve air quality for communities across the country, particularly those overburdened by air pollution.

“President Biden and his entire administration are working to ensure every community can breathe clean air. EPA’s Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicles Grant Program will slash climate and air pollution and enhance the country’s infrastructure by funding the deployment of zero-emissions vehicles and installation of supporting infrastructure,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “The program’s historic investment in zero-emission vehicles will secure our nation’s position as a global leader in clean technologies that address the impacts of climate change.”

"In addition to all the progress we’re making to electrify light-duty vehicles, today's funding from the EPA will catalyze projects that bring electric school buses, garbage trucks, and delivery vans to neighborhoods across America—reducing pollution in our communities and creating good-paying manufacturing jobs," said John Podesta, Senior Advisor to the President for International Climate Policy.

The 2024 Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicles Grant Program will support the adoption and deployment of eligible Class 6 and 7 zero-emission vehicles while also funding zero-emission vehicle fueling infrastructure and workforce development and training. Across the nation, over 3 million Class 6 and Class 7 vehicles are currently in use, spanning a wide variety of vehicle types and vocations, including school buses, refuse haulers, and utility and delivery trucks.

The Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicles Grant Program will help advance the President’s commitment to environmental justice and the Justice40 Initiative, which sets the goal that 40% of the overall benefits of certain federal investments in climate, clean energy, and other areas flow to disadvantaged communities that are marginalized by underinvestment and overburdened by pollution, including air pollution.

In the United States, the transportation sector is the largest source of greenhouse gas emissions, and a leading source of health-harming pollution. Most of the vehicles eligible for replacement are powered by internal combustion engines that pre-date recent EPA emission standards. These vehicles emit harmful pollutants like nitrogen oxide, fine particulate matter, and greenhouse gases. Pollution from these vehicles is associated with respiratory and cardiovascular disease, among other serious health problems. Children, older adults, those with preexisting cardiopulmonary disease, and those of lower socioeconomic status are particularly vulnerable and are at a higher risk for these health impacts.

The implementation of the 2024 Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicles Grant Program is designed to help applicants across the country transition to zero-emission vehicles and reduce air pollution, which will result in improved health outcomes, less noise pollution, and the creation of good-paying clean energy jobs.

To meet the needs of diverse potential recipients and encourage participation in this grant opportunity, EPA is providing two separate sub-program competitions under this single Notice of Funding Opportunity:

The School Bus Sub-Program for applicants replacing school buses.
The Vocational Vehicles Sub-Program for applicants replacing non-school bus Class 6 and 7 vehicles – including box trucks, refuse haulers, dump trucks, street sweepers, delivery trucks, bucket trucks, and utility trucks.
EPA anticipates approximately 70% of available funding will be for projects under the School Bus Sub-Program and approximately 30% of available funding will be for projects under the Vocational Vehicles Sub-Program.

Eligible applicants for both competitions include States, municipalities (including school districts), Indian Tribes, territories, and nonprofit school transportation associations. EPA anticipates awarding at least 15 grants to eligible applicants from Tribes and territories. Additionally, the Inflation Reduction Act statute requires that at least $400 million of the program’s funding go to projects that will serve one or more communities dealing with significant pollution as defined by EPA’s National Ambient Air Quality Standards.

This funding opportunity builds on the success of previous programs implemented by EPA, including the historic Diesel Emissions Reduction Act (DERA) program, which reduces harmful emissions from older diesel engines, and the Clean School Bus Program, which funds clean and electric school buses under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. Additionally, EPA recently announced the launch of the $3 billion Clean Ports Program to help tackle emissions from ports, including the movement of heavy-duty vehicles both in and out of communities surrounding US ports.

The deadline to apply for the 2024 Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicles Grant Program is July 25, 2024. EPA expects to announce awards by the end of this year.

To learn more about the Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicles Grant Program, applicant eligibility, selection process, and informational webinar dates, please visit the Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicles Grant Program webpage.

Questions may also be directed to cleanhdvehicles@epa.gov.

The US Environmental Protection Agency’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance recently issued its Strategic Civil-Criminal Enforcement Policy to strengthen the partnership between EPA’s civil and criminal enforcement programs. Collaboration between the two program offices is critical to promote robust and fair enforcement that holds polluters accountable, ensures justice for communities scarred by pollution, and upholds the rule of law to level the playing field for law-abiding companies.

This policy reinforces EPA’s efforts to reinvigorate its enforcement program under the leadership of Administrator Michael S. Regan. It identifies practices that will help ensure a more collaborative relationship between EPA’s civil and criminal enforcement offices going forward. The policy mandates joint strategic planning, rigorous case screening, and regular communication throughout the life of an enforcement matter.  A stronger partnership between EPA’s civil and criminal enforcement programs will enable EPA to better deliver on its commitment to realize the full benefits of environmental laws and promote greater fairness in enforcement.

“A fair and robust enforcement program requires strong alignment between EPA’s civil and criminal enforcement programs to hold polluters accountable, deter violations, and protect communities,” said Assistant Administrator David M. Uhlmann for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “With an integrated enforcement program, defined by a dynamic and strategic partnership between civil and criminal enforcement, EPA will be better able to address 21st century environmental problems and deliver on the promise of our Nation’s environmental laws.”

The policy requires the program offices to:

Increase collaboration throughout the strategic planning process,
Enhance case screening and improve case management to promote information sharing about violations, and
Update training programs to ensure effective partnership between civil and criminal enforcement offices and factors to consider in deciding whether to pursue criminal, civil, or administrative enforcement.
The new policy, effective immediately, was developed in close collaboration and consultation with regional and national enforcement programs.

For more information about EPA’s Enforcement program and learn how we address pollution problems please visit the agency’s Enforcement website.

EPA encourages the public to help the agency fulfill its mission to protect human health and the environment by sharing information about potentially harmful environmental activities in their communities or workplaces. To report a potential violation, visit EPA’s Report an Environmental Violation website.

Today, April 19, the US Environmental Protection Agency is issuing an emergency fuel waiver to allow E15 gasoline — gasoline blended with 15% ethanol — to be sold during the summer driving season. 

This action will provide communities with relief at the pump from ongoing market supply issues created by the ongoing war in Ukraine and conflict in the Middle East by increasing fuel supply and offering a variety of gasoline fuel blends from which consumers can choose. This waiver will help consumers protect themselves against fuel supply shocks by reducing our reliance on imported fossil fuels, continuing to bolster US energy independence, all while supporting American agriculture and manufacturing. Current estimates indicate that on average, E15 is about $0.25 a gallon cheaper than E10. 

“Under President Biden’s leadership, EPA is taking action to protect Americans from fuel supply challenges resulting from ongoing conflict overseas by ensuring consumers have more choices at the pump,” said Administrator Michael S. Regan. “Allowing E15 sales during the summer driving season will increase fuel supply, while supporting American farmers, strengthening our nation’s energy security, and providing relief to drivers across the country.”

The Clean Air Act allows the EPA Administrator, in consultation with the Department of Energy, to temporarily waive certain fuel requirements to address shortages. As a result of ongoing issues with gasoline supplies Administrator Regan determined that extreme and unusual fuel supply circumstances exist and has granted a temporary waiver to help ensure that an adequate supply of gasoline is available. As required by the Clean Air Act, EPA and DOE evaluated the situation and determined that granting the waiver was in the public interest. 

Currently, in approximately two-thirds of the country, E15 cannot be sold from terminals starting on May 1 and at retail stations starting on June 1. EPA is providing relief by extending the 1-psi Reid Vapor Pressure waiver that currently applies to E10 gasoline to E15, which will enable E15 sales throughout the summer driving season in these areas, if necessary. This action only extends the 1-psi waiver to E15 in parts of the country where it already exists for E10. E15 can already be sold year-round in parts of the country that have a Reformulated Gasoline  program. 

Because the RVP of E10 and E15 gasoline used by consumers will be the same, EPA does not expect any impact on air quality from this limited action. EPA’s research has shown no significant impact on evaporative emissions when the 1-psi waiver is extended to E15. With no significant impacts on emissions from cars and trucks, EPA expects consumers can continue to use E15 without concern that its use in the summer will impact air quality. 

EPA’s emergency fuel waiver will go into effect on May 1 when terminal operators would otherwise no longer be able to sell E15 in the affected regions of the country and will last through May 20 which is the statutory maximum of 20 days. EPA will continue to monitor the supply with industry and federal partners, and the Agency expects to issue new waivers effectively extending the emergency fuel waiver until such time as the extreme and unusual fuel supply circumstances due to the ongoing war in Ukraine and conflict in the Middle East are no longer present.

Today, April 15, the US Environmental Protection Agency denied a petition to remove stationary combustion turbines from the list of sources subject to regulation for emissions of air toxics, maintaining public health protections for communities near these facilities. As a result of denying this petition, stationary combustion turbines will continue to be required to comply with national limits on hazardous air pollutants such as formaldehyde under section 112 of the Clean Air Act.

“Today’s action will ensure people who live, work and play near these facilities are protected from harmful air pollution,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “EPA is committed to ensuring every community has clean air to breathe, especially those that have been overburdened and disproportionately impacted by poor air quality for too long.”

Stationary combustion turbines are typically located at power plants, compressor stations, landfills, and industrial facilities such as chemical plants. These turbines generally operate using natural gas, distillate oil, landfill gas, jet fuel, or process gas. Toxic emissions are present in the exhaust gases of these turbines and are the result of combustion of the gaseous and liquid fuels.

Today’s action supports EPA’s comprehensive approach to address climate and health-harming pollution from stationary combustion turbines. EPA is engaging with stakeholders on next steps for a broad-based approach to new and existing combustion turbines, including a proposed revision to the air toxics standards for combustion turbines as well as separate rulemakings to address ozone-forming pollution from new combustion turbines and to establish greenhouse gas emission guidelines for existing combustion turbines.

EPA’s section 112 regulations limit emissions of air toxics, also called hazardous air pollutants, such as formaldehyde, toluene, benzene, acetaldehyde, and metallic HAP (e.g., cadmium, chromium, manganese, lead, nickel). HAP are known to cause – or are suspected to cause – cancer or other serious adverse health and environmental effects. Formaldehyde and acetaldehyde are probable human carcinogens.

Petitioners requested EPA remove, or “delist,” combustion turbines, saying that cancer risks from this source category were below 1-in-1 million and would meet the statutory “delisting” threshold. EPA has reviewed data and analyses submitted as part of this petition as well as additional emissions testing data. EPA is denying the petition based on the agency’s determination that the petition is incomplete and because EPA cannot conclude that there are adequate data to determine that the delisting thresholds in the Clean Air Act have been met. This is primarily due to both the uncertainty in the HAP emissions from affected sources and the missing emissions data from a large number of affected sources in the petitioners’ risk analysis.

A pre-publication version of the notice and a fact sheet are available on the Stationary Combustion Turbines: National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants webpage.

Today, April 10, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), filed a complaint against USA Wholesale, Inc. (“USA Wholesale”), a San Jose corporation which sells engine lubricants, for unlawfully importing hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) through a port of the United States in 2022. 1 This is the first time EPA has used its authority under the American Innovation and Manufacturing Act of 2020 (“AIM Act”), to file an administrative complaint for illegally importing HFCs. The AIM Act, which implements the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol, by 2036 requires the United States to phase down HFC production and consumption by 85%.

 EPA designated climate change mitigation as a National Enforcement and Compliance Initiative (pdf), which includes addressing the illegal import of HFCs under the current phasedown. Over the last several months, the agency has taken several enforcement actions against companies for their illegal import of HFCs.

“EPA is using every enforcement tool available to hold companies accountable for the illegal importation of refrigerants that damage our climate and imperil future generations,” said David M. Uhlmann, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “This first-ever administrative complaint for the unlawful import of super-polluting HFCs advances EPA’s National Enforcement and Compliance Initiative on Mitigating Climate Change and demonstrates how EPA is intensifying its efforts to prevent the illegal importation of HFCs.” 2

USA Wholesale attempted to illegally import 34,480.3 pounds of HFC-134a, which is a potent greenhouse gas with a 100-year global warming potential of 1,430. EPA issued a letter recommending that Customs and Border Protection 3 deny the shipment entry into the US, and the HFCs were subsequently exported. If released into the atmosphere, these HFCs are the equivalent of 22,365 metric tons of carbon dioxide (“CO2”) or the same amount of CO2 produced from powering 4,414 homes with electricity for a year.

 The complaint seeks a ruling by the administrative law court that USA Wholesale’s importation and failure to submit required reports to EPA constitutes violations of the AIM Act and seeks civil penalties.

HFCs are a super climate pollutant with global warming potentials hundreds to thousands of times higher than CO2. The Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol, adopted in 2016, is expected to avoid up to 0.5°C of global warming by 2100.

 Since January 2022, EPA and CBP have denied entry to over 80 shipments of illegal HFCs. Under EPA’s HFC phasedown regulations, importers must expend allowances to import HFCs. Illegal imports of HFCs undermine the phasedown, disadvantage companies who follow the rules, and contribute to global warming.

 Achieving the goals of the HFC phasedown also requires accurate data. Thus, in addition to preventing illegal imports of HFCs, EPA is also using its enforcement authorities to target HFC importers that fail to accurately report their import quantities to EPA. The agency will continue to scrutinize the reporting data to ensure that it and the public have the best data available to make informed decisions on fighting climate change.

Background Information

More information related to HFCs, greenhouse gases, the AIM Act, and the climate change National Enforcement and Compliance Initiative are available on EPA’s website:

Addressing Climate Change in Enforcement and Compliance Assurance
Enforcement of the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program: HFC Importers
Enforcement of the American Innovation and Manufacturing Act of 2020
Fiscal Years 2024 – 2027 National Enforcement and Compliance Initiatives (NECIs)
Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program (GHGRP)
Information on Global Warming Potential
 If you suspect someone is illegally importing HFCs, tell EPA at its Report Environmental Violations website. Information you submit will be forwarded to EPA environmental enforcement personnel or to the appropriate regulatory authority.


Today, April 10, The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the US Department of Justice reached a settlement with Colonial Oil Industries Inc., that will require the company to pay a civil penalty of more than $2.8 million and spend an estimated $12.2 million to offset the detrimental human health and environmental impacts of Colonial’s alleged failure to meet obligations under the Clean Air Act’s Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) program and gasoline volatility standards.

“Renewable fuels play a critical role in diversifying our country’s energy mix and reducing greenhouse gas emissions, all while providing good paying jobs and economic benefits to communities across the country,” said Assistant Administrator David M. Uhlmann of the EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “This settlement once more puts gasoline and diesel refiners and importers on notice that they must meet their obligations to reduce climate- and health-harming pollution and that there will be consequences if they do not.”

Between 2013 and 2019, Colonial excluded certain fuel it supplied to marine vessels from its renewable volume obligations calculations in violation of the RFS regulations. Fuel intended for use only in ocean-going vessels is not required to be included in renewable volume obligation calculations. But not all marine vessels are ocean-going vessels, and volumes supplied to non-oceangoing vessels must be included in such calculations. Colonial’s actions resulted in less renewable fuel being used in lieu of gasoline and diesel fuel, causing increased greenhouse gas emissions.

“The creation and use of renewable fuels reduces overall greenhouse gas emissions,” said Assistant Attorney General Todd Kim of the Justice Department’s Environment and Natural Resources Division. “This proposed settlement will hold Colonial to the same renewable fuel requirements that all importers and producers must adhere to.”

Under the RFS program, refiners or importers of gasoline or diesel fuel are required to either blend renewable fuels into transportation fuel or purchase credits known as Renewable Identification Numbers (RINs) to meet their renewable volume obligations. Between 2013 and 2019, Colonial failed to purchase and retire enough RINs. The settlement requires Colonial to purchase and retire over 9 million RINs within two years at an estimated cost of approximately $12.2 million. The RIN purchase and retirements is estimated to result in over 18,300 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent reductions which equates to powering 2,386 homes’ energy use or 4,355 gasoline cars for a year.

Colonial also sold over a million gallons of gasoline that failed to meet the applicable volatility standard which is intended to reduce evaporative emissions during the summer season from gasoline that contributes to smog and to reduce the effects of ozone-related health problems such as asthma, emphysema and chronic bronchitis.

The proposed settlement, lodged in the US District Court for the Southern District of Georgia, is subject to a 30-day public comment period and final court approval.

Today, April 9, the US Environmental Protection Agency issued a final rule that will significantly reduce toxic air pollution from chemical plants, including ethylene oxide and chloroprene. EPA’s action will advance President Biden’s commitment to environmental justice by slashing more than 6,200 tons of toxic air pollution each year, dramatically reducing the number of people with elevated cancer risk due to toxic air pollution in communities surrounding plants covered by the rule. Once implemented, the rule will reduce both EtO and chloroprene emissions from covered processes and equipment by nearly 80%. A requirement for these facilities to conduct fenceline monitoring for key toxic chemicals is included, and EPA will make the data publicly available to better inform and safeguard nearby communities.

Today’s action is the latest in recent weeks to protect communities from EtO pollution, following a final rule to dramatically reduce EtO emissions from commercial sterilization facilities. Both rules advance the Biden Cancer Moonshot, a commitment to ending cancer as we know it, while advancing environmental justice in communities overburdened by toxic chemicals.

Today’s final rule delivers critical health protections for communities that Administrator Michael Regan visited as part of his Journey to Justice tour.

“President Biden believes every community in this country deserves to breathe clean air. That’s why I took the Journey to Justice tour to communities like St. John the Baptist Parish, where residents have borne the brunt of toxic air for far too long,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “We promised to listen to folks that are suffering from pollution and act to protect them. Today we deliver on that promise with strong final standards to slash pollution, reduce cancer risk, and ensure cleaner air for nearby communities.”

“By issuing strong clean air standards and requiring companies to monitor pollution at the fenceline, the Biden-Harris Administration is protecting communities from toxic chemicals that can cause cancer and ensuring people know what is in their air. This critical step advances President Biden’s commitment to environmental justice for overburdened communities and will help keep children safe from toxic chemical exposure,” said White House Council on Environmental Quality Chair Brenda Mallory.

“This announcement is a monumental step towards safeguarding public health and the environment. By slashing over 6,200 tons of toxic air pollutants annually and implementing fenceline monitoring, this addresses health risks in surrounding communities and promotes environmental justice in states like Louisiana. With a substantial reduction of nearly 80% in emissions from covered sources, this is a significant stride towards protecting current and future generations from the harmful effects of these carcinogenic chemicals and demonstrates a path forward for communities and industry to coexist,” said Congressman Troy A. Carter, Sr. (LA-02).

“Today marks a victory in the pursuit for environmental justice, with the final rule poised to significantly reduce the toxic air pollution that harms communities in Texas’s Gulf Coast, Louisiana’s Cancer Alley, and throughout the US,” said Earthjustice Vice President for Healthy Communities Patrice Simms. “Setting protective air standards for over 200 chemical plants and requiring fenceline monitoring for some of the most toxic emissions shows a commitment to protecting public health. We look forward to the EPA’s swift implementation and rigorous enforcement of this critical rule.”

Today’s action applies to certain equipment and processes at about 200 plants that make synthetic organic chemicals and a variety of polymers and resins, including neoprene. Once implemented, it will reduce both EtO and chloroprene emissions from covered processes and equipment by nearly 80%. Long-term exposure to these two chemicals can increase the risk of certain types of cancer, such as lymphoma, leukemia, breast cancer and liver cancer. EPA also expects the rule to better protect children, who are more exposed and more susceptible to the effects of toxic chemicals including EtO and chloroprene.

The rule also reduces additional air toxics, such as benzene, 1,3-butadiene, ethylene dichloride and vinyl chloride. By cutting emissions of these chemicals, the rule will reduce the risks of developing cancer from breathing in toxic air pollutants. In addition, the rule will reduce smog-forming volatile organic compounds by 23,700 tons a year.

The final rule will provide critical public health protections for overburdened communities near covered plants. When EPA proposed the rule, it conducted a first-of-its-kind community risk assessment to provide the public with the best possible information about existing health risks from air toxics exposure and how the proposal would affect them. That assessment examined the air toxics-related risks from all large facilities in communities within about six miles of the plants – including facilities that would not be covered by the rule – to provide a more complete picture of the air toxics-related risk in these communities. The assessment showed that the rule would reduce the number of people who have elevated air toxics-related cancer risk by 96% in those communities – and the final delivers those reductions.

Requirements in the final rule are largely the same as what EPA proposed. However, the agency made several changes to proposed requirements in response to public comments.

The final rule includes a fenceline monitoring requirements for covered processes and equipment that make, use, store or emit EtO, chloroprene, benzene, 1,3-butadiene, ethylene dichloride or vinyl chloride, as proposed, but modifies the compliance deadlines to implement these requirements. EPA had proposed to require monitoring to begin one year after the effective date of the rule. For fenceline monitoring at synthetic organic chemical manufacturing plants, the agency is setting a deadline of two years in response to comments that facilities and laboratories need additional preparation time to begin the monitoring programs. For neoprene production sources, EPA is setting a 90-day deadline for beginning fenceline monitoring of chloroprene emissions.

For all six pollutants, owners and operators must find the source of the pollution and make repairs if annual average air concentrations of the chemicals are higher than a specified action level at the fenceline. The action levels vary depending on the chemical.

To ensure the results of fenceline monitoring are available to communities, EPA will make the monitoring data publicly available on its WebFIRE webpage. The fenceline monitoring provisions in the final rule are modeled on similar Clean Air Act requirements for petroleum refineries first established in 2015, which have been historically successful in identifying and reducing benzene emissions.

EPA is also working to reduce emissions from other sources of EtO, including from chemical plants that produce polyether polyols, and taking additional actions to address EtO emissions and advance EtO research, such as:

Investigating additional sources of EtO (e.g., stand-alone warehouses) and opportunities for emissions controls.
Enforcing existing regulations as appropriate.
Conducting research to better understand and measure EtO.

Today, March 29, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced final national greenhouse gas pollution standards for heavy-duty vehicles, such as freight trucks and buses, for model years 2027 through 2032. The standards will avoid 1 billion tons of greenhouse gas emissions and provide $13 billion in annualized net benefits to society related to public health, the climate, and savings for truck owners and operators. The final standards will also reduce dangerous air pollution, especially for the 72 million people in the United States who live near truck freight routes, bear the burden of higher levels of pollution, and are more likely to be people of color or come from low-income households.

The “Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards for Heavy-Duty Vehicles - Phase 3” standards will provide greater certainty for industry, while catalyzing private investment, supporting US manufacturing jobs in advanced vehicle technologies, and invigorating and strengthening the US economy. Over the next decade, these final standards, paired with President Biden’s historic Investing in America agenda and investments in US manufacturing, will set the US heavy-duty sector on a trajectory for sustained growth.

EPA’s latest modeling shows that the final standards will result in greater reductions of pollution than the proposed rule, while providing more time and flexibility for manufacturers to develop, scale, and deploy clean heavy-duty vehicle technologies. The 1 billion tons of greenhouse gas emissions avoided by these standards is equivalent to the emissions from more than 13 million tanker trucks’ worth of gasoline. With this action, the Biden-Harris Administration is continuing to deliver on the most ambitious climate agenda in history while advancing a historic commitment to environmental justice.

“In finalizing these emissions standards for heavy-duty vehicles like trucks and buses, EPA is significantly cutting pollution from the hardest working vehicles on the road,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “Building on our recently finalized rule for light- and medium-duty vehicles, EPA’s strong and durable vehicle standards respond to the urgency of the climate crisis by making deep cuts in emissions from the transportation sector.”

“EPA’s standards complement President Biden’s unprecedented investment in our workers and communities to reduce harmful emissions, while strengthening our manufacturing capacity for the transportation technologies of the future,” said President Biden’s National Climate Advisor Ali Zaidi. “By tackling pollution from heavy-duty vehicles, we can unlock extraordinary public health, climate, and economic gains.”

Trucks and other heavy-duty vehicles are vital to the United States economy, transporting goods and freight and providing services for industry, transit, and other sectors. At the same time, heavy-duty vehicles account for 25 percent of all greenhouse gas emissions from the transportation sector, which is itself the single largest source of greenhouse gas emissions in the United States. Greenhouse gas emissions are the primary driver of climate change and its impacts, including more severe heat waves, drought, sea level rise, extreme climate and weather events, coastal flooding, and catastrophic wildfires.

“Today’s announcement demonstrates that a zero-emission heavy-duty vehicle future is not only achievable, but more essential than ever given the disproportionate rate of greenhouse gas emissions from buses and trucks,” said Senator Alex Padilla (D-CA). “This historic rule reflects California’s leadership and heeds my consistent calls to implement a strong HDV emissions rule that will transform our transportation sector and safeguard clean air for all, including for disadvantaged communities in freight corridors. I also applaud the Biden Administration for recently launching a whole-of-government strategy to deploy the zero-emission heavy-duty infrastructure needed to make this transition a success.” 1

“The American Lung Association is pleased to support the new cleaner trucks standards,” said Paul G. Billings, National Senior Vice President, Public Policy, American Lung Association. “Today’s rule will improve the air we breathe and curb the pollution that is driving climate change. This rule is the capstone of the Clean Trucks Plan. The strong standards finalized today build on the 2023 rule to address oxides of nitrogen and last week’s multipollutant rule that will clean up light-and medium-duty vehicles. The result will be cleaner air and better health, especially in communities with heavy truck traffic nearby.”

“Sierra Club is pleased that the EPA has finalized the federal heavy-duty vehicle standards, which will help cut emissions from large polluting trucks and buses,” said Katherine García, Director of the Sierra Club’s Clean Transportation for All campaign. “The new standards reflect Congress' long standing demand for healthy air along with its recent historic investments in getting cleaner vehicles on our roads, corridors, and ports. Together, they are a game changer. With the climate crisis underway and many of our communities facing unprecedented fires, droughts, and floods, it’s crucial that truck manufacturers get into the fast lane with zero-emission trucks to deliver the climate, health, and economic benefits we deserve.”

"Hip Hop Caucus is encouraged by EPA's new federal emissions standards for trucks, which will reduce the harmful air pollution that disproportionately affects Black, Brown, Indigenous and low-income communities near ports, roadways and highways,” said Russell Armstrong, Senior Director of Campaigns and Advocacy at the Hip Hop Caucus. “This is a meaningful step in the right direction. We will continue to work with EPA to make sure that clean vehicles are accessible and affordable for all.”

Heavy-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Standards

Today’s “Phase 3” standards build on EPA’s Heavy-Duty Phase 2 program from 2016 and maintain that program’s flexible structure, which is designed to reflect the diverse nature of the heavy-duty vehicle industry. The standards are technology-neutral and performance-based, allowing each manufacturer to choose what set of emissions control technologies is best suited for them and the needs of their customers. Available technologies include advanced internal combustion engine vehicles, hybrid vehicles, plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, battery electric vehicles, and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles. These new standards apply to heavy-duty vocational vehicles (such as delivery trucks, refuse haulers, public utility trucks, and transit, shuttle, and school buses) and tractors (such as day cabs and sleeper cabs on tractor-trailer trucks).

Relative to the proposal, EPA’s final rule provides more time in the early model years of the program for the development of vehicle technologies and deployment of charging and refueling infrastructure. The final rule also includes flexibilities that will assist manufacturers in meeting the standards in the early years of the program while preserving incentives for early adoption of advanced technologies.

EPA received extensive feedback on the proposed rule, including over 175,000 public comments, testimony at public hearings, and engagement with stakeholder groups. The final standards were informed by the best available data and information in the public record and rigorous technical assessments, including consideration of the extensive public input EPA received in response to the proposed rulemaking.

Prioritizing Public Health and Climate Benefits

Pollution from heavy-duty vehicles contributes to climate change and can exacerbate serious health issues such as respiratory and heart ailments, especially for the 72 million people in the United States who live close to truck freight routes and are more likely to be people of color or come from low-income households. Today’s final heavy-duty greenhouse gas standards complete EPA’s Clean Trucks Plan for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and other harmful air pollutants (including nitrogen oxides (NOx), particulate matter (PM), and air toxics) from heavy-duty vehicles through a series of rulemakings. These rules include today’s standards as well as (1) EPA’s recently finalized light- and medium-duty vehicle multipollutant standards for MY 2027-2032 (which covers Class 2b and 3 trucks), and (2) EPA’s December 2022 rule to control smog- and soot-forming emissions from heavy-duty engines and vehicles. The Clean Trucks Plan represents the most protective set of EPA regulations ever for the on-road sector, significantly reducing pollution, protecting public health, and responding to the urgency of climate change.

Savings and Customer Choice

There is a wide variety of trucks and other heavy-duty vehicles on the road, serving a diverse array of needs and customers. Today’s standards recognize the diversity of vehicle types and encourage further innovations in clean vehicle technology, enhancing options at the dealership that will also save customers, owners, and operators money through reduced fuel and maintenance costs. Under these new standards, the heavy-duty industry is expected to realize annualized savings of $3.5 billion compared to annualized costs of about $1.1 billion from 2027 through 2055.

After accounting for the vehicle purchase tax credits provided under President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act, the typical buyer of new clean technology vocational vehicles and day cabs in 2032 when the standards are fully phased in will save money on the upfront cost of the vehicles and recoup any additional costs, such as the purchase and installation of vehicle charging equipment, in two to four years. The typical buyer of new clean technology sleeper cab will recoup the upfront cost of a vehicle in five years. A purchaser of a heavy-duty truck in 2032 – when the standards are fully phased in – could save between $3,700 and $10,500 on fuel and maintenance costs annually, depending on vehicle type.

Working with Stakeholders Throughout Phase 3 Implementation

EPA’s analysis finds that heavy-duty vehicle technologies, charging and refueling infrastructure, and supply chains will be available to support the final standards. At the same time, EPA has committed to actively monitor and track the technologies the heavy-duty vehicle manufacturers are developing and deploying, and the deployment of heavy-duty vehicle electric charging and hydrogen fueling infrastructure in order to ensure the successful implementation of the Phase 3 program.

EPA will consult with a wide range of stakeholders on an ongoing basis to learn from their experiences and gather relevant information and data. These stakeholders will include, at a minimum, trucking fleets and trucking trade associations; heavy-duty vehicle owner-operators; heavy-duty vehicle manufacturers; investor-owned utilities, public utilities, and electricity cooperatives; infrastructure providers and installers; state and local governments, communities with environmental justice concerns; and environmental and public health NGOs. In consultation with other agencies, beginning as early as 2026, EPA will issue periodic reports reflecting the collected information throughout the lead-up to and during the implementation of the Phase 3 standards. Based on these reports, the agency may decide to issue guidance documents, initiate a future rulemaking to consider modifications to the Phase 3 rule, or make no changes to the program.

In parallel to the Phase 3 rule, the Joint Office of Energy and Transportation and the Department of Energy, in collaboration with the Department of Transportation and the Environmental Protection Agency, recently announced the first-ever National Zero Emission Freight Corridor Strategy, an all-of-government action plan for deploying a world-class zero-emission freight network across the nation by 2040. The Strategy prioritizes high-traffic routes and freight hubs to catalyze four phases of public and private investment in heavy-duty zero-emission transportation, with a focus on reducing harmful emissions for the most affected communities.

Investing in America’s Clean Transportation Future

The final standards align with and support the commitments and billions of dollars’ worth of investments from trucking fleets, vehicle manufacturers, and vehicle technology firms as they plan to increase the use or production of clean vehicle technologies in trucking and other heavy-duty fleets. These investments are resulting in a range of technologies with the potential for further significant reductions of greenhouse gas emissions from heavy-duty motor vehicles.

EPA recently announced the launch of the $3 billion Clean Ports Program to help tackle emissions from heavy-duty vehicles both in and out of US port communities. Along with EPA’s long-standing Diesel Emissions Reduction Act (DERA) program which reduces harmful emissions from diesel engines, the new Bipartisan Infrastructure Law Clean School Bus Program, and an upcoming clean heavy-duty program to fund the replacement of existing Class 6 or Class 7 vehicles with clean technology vehicles, we are making changes in communities now to reduce emissions from the heavy-duty fleet. Together, these programs are offering billions of dollars in funding to replace older vehicles and engines with clean vehicle technology options.

As the EPA finalizes the rule, the Biden-Harris Administration is also investing funds in communities across America from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to promote clean transportation, including building a national network of EV chargers and alternative-fuel stations; ensuring domestic manufacturers have the materials they need to make EV batteries; and funding clean transit and clean school buses, with priority for underserved communities. In addition, funding through the Inflation Reduction Act will directly support the clean-vehicle transition through support for domestic battery manufacturing and clean vehicle purchases for owners, operators, and businesses.

For more information on the Phase 3 Final Rulemaking, please visit EPA’s Final Rule: Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards for Heavy-Duty Vehicles – Phase 3 website.

Here’s what other leaders are saying about the final rule:

Sean Waters, Vice President Product Integrity for Daimler Truck North America: “We thank the agency for addressing industry concern about the challenges of the early years of the rule and we remain committed to upholding the spirit of this regulation.  At Daimler Truck North America, it is our aspiration to offer only carbon-neutral new vehicles in the US by 2039 and our comprehensive product portfolio of state-of-the-art trucks will ensure our customers can transition to greener transportation on the road ahead.  Ultimately, the successful transition of the commercial vehicle industry is dependent on the availability of reliable zero emission charging and refueling infrastructure and the ability to conduct business at a reasonable cost of ownership.  We appreciate the regulation’s recognition of this fact and look forward to working with the EPA as well as federal and state governments to deliver both.”

Senator Tom Carper (D-DE), Chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee: “Curbing emissions from heavy-duty vehicles is a win-win for the planet and public health. It supports the United States in reaching President Biden’s ambitious climate goals while cleaning up the air we breathe. Today’s rule will be especially critical for disadvantaged communities located near freight corridors that are overburdened by air pollution, as well as the millions of children who are currently riding dirty diesel buses to school each day. I commend the EPA for their continued work to build a clean transportation future for America.”

Representative Pete Aguilar (CA-33): “I am glad to see that the EPA’s new emission standards will drastically lower carbon emissions, reducing smog and pollution in the Inland Empire. Not only does this rule make crucial progress in combatting climate change, but it will also contribute to better health outcomes in our community and create more jobs in the clean energy sector. I look forward to working with the EPA on implementing these standards in our community and advocating in Congress for more clean energy solutions.”

Cynthia Williams, Global Director for Sustainability, Ford Motor Company: “The EPA’s new heavy-duty emissions rule is challenging, but Ford is working aggressively to meet the moment. Our industry is making important progress to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in both light- and heavy-duty vehicles. We also need policymakers to pair emission standards with incentives and public investment so that we can continue to deliver on the next generation of vehicles and for our nation to lead the future of this industry.”

Neha Palmer, CEO and Co-Founder, Terawatt: “Fleet charging solutions providers like Terawatt are proud to be investing billions into infrastructure that supports electrification at scale. We look forward to continue working with fleets incorporating EVs to ensure that charging is available as trucks continue to hit the road — and initiatives that get EVs closer to cost parity with ICE vehicles are crucial. These standards, combined with the National Zero Emission Freight Strategy released earlier this month, gives the industry a coordinated pathway towards accelerated uptake of zero-emission vehicles."

Today, March 21, 2024, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced a settlement with Resonac America Inc. to address the company’s illegal import of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) at the Port of Los Angeles on four occasions in 2023 and 2024. Resonac America, which is a subsidiary of the Tokyo-based Resonac Corporation, will pay a penalty of $416,003 and destroy 1,693 pounds of HFCs to resolve EPA’s allegations of violations.

“EPA continues to prioritize enforcement against companies that illegally import refrigerants that damage our climate and imperil future generations,” said David M. Uhlmann, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “This case is the largest penalty imposed to date for importing super-polluting HFCs as part of EPA’s National Enforcement and Compliance Initiative on Mitigating Climate Change—and the first to require the company to destroy the HFCs.”

“HFCs are a powerful climate pollutant, so it’s imperative that companies importing them into our nation do so in strict accordance with environmental laws,” said EPA Pacific Southwest Regional Administrator Martha Guzman. “This is the latest in a series of EPA HFC enforcement efforts nationwide, which send a clear message that the federal government is vigilantly monitoring imports of HFCs and will hold illegal actors accountable.”

On three separate occasions – in October, November and December 2023 – Resonac America imported a total of 6,208 pounds of illegal HFCs into the United States at the Port of Los Angeles. These imports violated the prohibition on importing bulk regulated substances into the United States without possessing sufficient consumption or application-specific allowances at the time of import. Resonac America also failed to give EPA the required notice of planned shipments of HFCs for the 2023 shipments and a February 2024 shipment, as well as failed to timely submit reports to the EPA with information on HFCs that the company imported in the first and second quarters of 2023.

Resonac America imported HFC-23 which is a potent greenhouse gas with a 100-year global warming potential of 14,800. This enforcement action prevented approximately 6,208 pounds, or 2.816 metric tons, of illegal HFCs from being imported into the US If released into the atmosphere, these HFCs are the equivalent of 41,676.8 metric tons of CO2, or the same amount of CO2 produced from powering 8,225 homes with electricity for a year.

HFCs are a super climate pollutant with global warming potentials hundreds to thousands of times higher than CO2. For this reason, pursuant to the Montreal Protocol and its Kigali Amendment, production and imports of HFCs are being phased down 85% from historical levels by developed countries by 2036. EPA has made it a national enforcement and compliance priority to address the illegal import of HFCs under the current phasedown and has settled numerous cases over the last several months with companies regarding HFC imports.

The Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol, adopted in 2016, is a global agreement to phase down HFCs by 2036 for the United States and other developed countries, and is expected to avoid up to 0.5°C of global warming by 2100.

In response to the Kigali Amendment, Congress passed the bipartisan American Innovation and Manufacturing Act of 2020 (AIM Act), requiring the United States to phase down HFC production and consumption by 85% by 2036. Since January 2022, EPA and CBP have denied entry to approximately 81 shipments of illegal HFCs. Under EPA’s HFC phasedown regulations, importers must expend allowances to import HFCs. Illegal imports of HFCs undermine the phasedown, disadvantage companies who follow the rules, and contribute to global warming.

More information related to HFCs, greenhouse gases, the AIM Act, and the climate change National Enforcement and Compliance Initiative are available on EPA’s website:

Enforcement of the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program: HFC Importers web page.
Enforcement of the American Innovation and Manufacturing Act of 2020 web page.
Fiscal Years 2024 – 2027 National Enforcement and Compliance Initiatives (NECIs) web page.
Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program (GHGRP) web page.
If you suspect someone is illegally importing HFCs, tell EPA at its Report Environmental Violations website. Information you submit will be forwarded to EPA environmental enforcement personnel or to the appropriate regulatory authority.

Today, March 20, the US Environmental Protection Agency finalized the strongest pollution standards for passenger cars, light-duty trucks, and medium-duty vehicles in history. These standards will avoid more than 7 billion tons of carbon emissions and provide nearly $100 billion of annual net benefits to society, including $13 billion of annual public health benefits due to improved air quality, and $62 billion in reduced annual fuel costs, and maintenance and repair costs for drivers.

Leaders from across business and labor, advocacy and public health groups, and government are praising the final standards. See what they are saying:

Business and Labor Leaders

Ford Motor Company:

“We appreciate EPA’s efforts and collaboration in strengthening greenhouse gas emissions standards in ways that reflect the realities of the EV transition. The agency’s final rule is ambitious and challenging, and achieving its requirements will take close public-private cooperation. Ford will continue to lower emissions while offering our customers choices across hybrid, plug-in hybrid and fully electric vehicles that are highly functional and fun to drive – including America’s best-selling hybrid and fully electric trucks.”

General Motors:

“GM supports the goals of the EPA’s final rule and its intention to significantly reduce emissions. Although challenging, we believe our commitments and investments in an all-electric future place GM in an excellent position to contribute to the goals of the final rule. While we review the details, we encourage continued coordination across the US federal government and with the California Air Resources Board to ensure the auto industry can successfully transition to electrification.”

Stellantis:

“Electrification is vital to our Dare Forward vision, which includes a genuine commitment to provide our customers with no-compromise driving experiences that also benefit the environment. While the later-year targets remain aggressive, the final rule improves on the proposal by better reflecting the expected trajectory of market demand and enabling infrastructure.  It is critical that forthcoming rules align with this proposal so that US manufacturers can effectively comply with a single set of rules.”

John Bozzella, Alliance for Automotive Innovation:

 “The future is electric. Automakers are committed to the EV transition – investing enormous amounts of capital and building cutting edge battery electric vehicles, plug-in hybrids, traditional hybrids and fuel cell vehicles that drive efficiency and convert petroleum miles to electric miles. Consumers have tons of choices.

“But pace matters. Moderating the pace of EV adoption in 2027, 2028, 2029 and 2030 was the right call because it prioritizes more reasonable electrification targets in the next few (very critical) years of the EV transition.

“These adjusted EV targets – still a stretch goal – should give the market and supply chains a chance to catch up. It buys some time for more public charging to come online and the industrial incentives and policies of the Inflation Reduction Act to do their thing.

“And the big one? The rules are mindful of the importance of choice to drivers and preserves their ability to choose the vehicle that’s right for them.”

United Automobile Workers:

“The UAW has a strong commitment to protecting the environment and fully supports efforts to create a cleaner domestic auto industry. The climate crisis has taken a heavy toll on working people, who have had to endure the consequences of corporate America’s decisions to put profits before a clean environment and a fair economy. That needs to change. The UAW is proudly leading the fight for a just transition so the shift to electric vehicles truly benefits workers and the environment, not just the auto industry and Wall Street.  The EPA has made significant progress on its final greenhouse gas emissions rule for light-duty vehicles. By taking seriously the concerns of workers and communities, the EPA has created a more feasible emissions rule that protects workers building ICE vehicles, while providing a path forward for automakers to implement the full range of automotive technologies to reduce emissions. This rule does not require Ford, General Motors, Stellantis or any other domestic automaker to do anything beyond the commitments they’ve made to shareholders to capitalize on the growing EV market. We reject the fearmongering that says tackling the climate crisis must come at the cost of union jobs. Ambitious and achievable regulations can support both. We call on the Biden Administration to hold automakers accountable so that this rule is not used as an excuse to cut or offshore jobs. 

The billionaire class and their allies in government expect workers to bear the brunt of the crisis. When it comes to the EV transition, corporations see an opportunity to collect taxpayer subsidies, increase profits, lower job quality and leave workers behind. Reaching our climate goals requires massive public investments. Government subsidies must create quality union jobs by including strong labor standards that require employers to meet or exceed industry standards, protect workers’ right to organize, and invest in communities impacted by the transition. This moment calls for a whole of government approach to ensure the next generation of vehicles are made in the United States and the auto industry supports quality union jobs for American workers. This transition should be a clear victory for working people, not another reason to look over our shoulder, wondering when our plants will close or our jobs will be cut. From trade policy to new legislation to environmental regulation to clean energy implementation, all policies must point in the same direction toward a just transition for autoworkers.  

The transition to cleaner technologies cannot be used to intensify the global race to the bottom through offshoring and low wages. We need to see movement by the administration to protect these jobs. The nascent EV industry needs tariff protections – otherwise we are going to be awash in imports.  The stakes of the transition are high for American workers. We will continue to work with the Administration and fight to get these policies right for American autoworkers.  UAW members are doing our part by fighting for and winning important Just Transition provisions through bargaining and organizing at new EV and battery plants across the country. UAW members at the Big Three used their power to win critical investment commitments, job security provisions, and job quality standards to ensure workers are not left behind in the transition to cleaner vehicles. And just this week, over 4,000 workers building ICEVs and BEVs at Volkswagen in Chattanooga, Tenn., announced they are standing up and filing a petition with the National Labor Relations Board for a vote to join the UAW. But UAW members should not have to shoulder the burden of a just transition on our own. We need policymakers who will support these efforts, from the halls of Congress to the picket line.” 

Emily Fisher, EEI Executive Vice President, Clean Energy and General Counsel:

“EEI and our member electric companies have fully embraced a strategy that will deliver resilient clean energy to the customers and communities that we serve. Electrifying the transportation sector will be key to reducing emissions across the economy and to achieving our goals for a carbon-free future. We look forward to working with EPA Administrator Regan to help build the electric vehicle charging infrastructure needed to accelerate the clean energy and electric transportation transition.”

Albert Gore, Executive Director of the Zero Emission Transportation Association:

“These standards make clear that securing America’s global leadership in manufacturing and securing a better future are 100% aligned. We have everything we need today to meet and exceed this standard, and that means more of the vehicles sold in America will be made in America.”

Ben Prochazka, Executive Director of the Electrification Coalition:

“Today’s action provides necessary regulatory certainty and is another opportunity to ensure we end our nation’s dependence on oil for transportation. We are seeing strong EV sales growth, with almost five million EVs sold in the US Transportation electrification is no longer a question of ‘if’ but a question of ‘when. Because global oil markets are controlled by bad actors who do not share our democratic values, shifting away from oil and toward electricity makes the US stronger and safer. With this clarity, we have the opportunity to leverage important commitments from the automotive industry, action at the local, state, and federal levels, and powerful technology to accelerate EV adoption. By plugging into a diverse and domestic grid, we are driving electric, building electric, and powering electric, which will create good American jobs and help ensure the US maintains its automotive leadership. We appreciate the Biden-Harris administration’s ongoing efforts to advance transportation electrification, including yesterday’s US Department of Energy announcement of an updated fuel economy formula for EVs and generational investments through the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation Reduction Act.”

Genevieve Cullen, President of the Electric Drive Transportation Association (EDTA):

“EDTA supports the work of the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Administration to combat climate change, and we applaud the national commitment to advancing e-mobility. The final rule calling for aggressive light-duty and medium-duty vehicle emissions reductions underscores the potential for greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction through the entire suite of electric drive technologies, encompassing hybrid electric vehicles, plug-in hybrid EVs, battery EVs, and fuel cell EVs. EDTA appreciates the evolution of this rule, which maintains ambitious GHG reduction goals while providing meaningful milestones for the market and essential benefits to consumers and the nation.” 1

Environmental and Public Health Organizations

Amanda Leland, Executive Director of Environmental Defense Fund:

“This is a day to celebrate American achievement. The step EPA is taking today will slash climate pollution and air pollution. It will bring more jobs for workers, more choices and more savings for consumers, and a healthier future for our children.  The US has leapt forward in the global race to invest in clean vehicles, with $188 billion and nearly 200,000 jobs on the way. Jobs in communities across the country, in places like Michigan, Nevada, and Kentucky. These clean car standards will help supercharge economic expansion and make America stronger. Ask the Air Force veteran who wants a powerful car that doesn’t run on foreign oil. Ask the third-generation auto dealer in Michigan who wants to be able to sell made-in-America clean cars. Ask my 76-year-old parents, who drive a clean car because it costs less and will help leave a better world for their grandchildren.

These new standards will mean more choices. Better, faster, more fun, cheaper clean cars and passenger trucks of all kinds. American ingenuity will give families more options than ever before – and choosing an electric vehicle will save thousands in fuel costs in the process.  Finally – and most importantly to me, as a mom – these new standards will mean healthier days ahead for us all. Today’s action will cut over seven billion tons of climate pollution – that’s more than all US greenhouse gas pollution last year. It will slash deadly soot and reduce smog. That means fewer asthma attacks, less heart disease, and longer lives. The reality is clean cars will save kids.  The future is electric – built on a shared, pollution-free vision grounded in economic prosperity, job growth, and consumer savings. Today we continue our journey toward a cleaner, healthier world. As a mom, I want to thank everyone who made it possible.”

Manish Bapna, President and CEO of Natural Resources Defense Council:

“This is where the rubber meets the road on climate. These commonsense standards will slash the source of a fifth of the nation’s carbon footprint.  Over time, these rules will prevent more carbon pollution than the entire US economy coughs up in a year. They’ll save drivers money at the pump and cut tailpipe pollution that endangers public health. In the longer journey to confront the climate crisis, these standards take us in the right direction. They signal a commitment to stay the course, build on gathering momentum and see the mission through to its finish. That’s what confronting the climate crisis demands.”

Abigail Dillen, President of Earthjustice:

“The Environmental Protection Agency has taken a major step forward to clean up tailpipe pollution and address the climate crisis by accelerating the essential transition to clean cars and trucks. These standards make clear what we already know: the future of cars is electric. And there is more work ahead to clean up pollution and modernize our transportation sector. It is critical that our large auto manufacturers take advantage of the extra time EPA has provided to ramp up their investments in clean, zero-emissions vehicles for the sake of our lungs, our health and the climate. The US auto industry cannot afford to fall behind the rest of the world.”

Harold Wimmer, President and CEO of American Lung Association:

“EPA just took a critical step to address climate change and reduce air pollution. Stronger limits on pollution from cars, pickups and SUVs will improve the air that everyone breathes and help prevent future health harms from climate change. We are especially pleased to see the final rule includes strong standards to reduce particulate matter from new gasoline vehicles. The strict standards will require state-of-the-art pollution controls that are widely used in Europe and Asia and will save lives.  While we applaud the stricter limits on car emissions, EPA must also urgently finalize stringent standards to limit greenhouse gas emissions from heavy-duty vehicles, including freight trucks and buses. Trucks represent a small fraction of total on-road vehicles but generate the greatest share of harmful air pollutants. Reducing emissions from both cars and trucks is critical to improving public health, advancing health equity and addressing climate change.

Cleaning up future cars has widespread public support. A recent poll released by the Lung Association found that a strong majority of voters support the EPA setting stricter limits on emissions from light-duty vehicles like cars or trucks.  That same poll found that cleaning up trucks is popular, too. Seven in ten voters support EPA setting stricter limits on carbon emissions from heavy-duty vehicles.

“The widespread and rapid shift to zero-emission transportation is necessary to improve lung health and save lives. Everyone deserves to breathe clean and healthy air. The Lung Association’s  ‘Zeroing in on Healthy Air’ report highlights that a widespread transition to zero-emission transportation and electricity would dramatically improve health. In fact, the transition would result in up to 110,000 fewer deaths and $1.2 trillion in public health benefits across the United States by 2050. The Lung Association now calls on President Biden and EPA to continue its work finalizing clean air and climate protections, including strong final cleaner trucks standards, measures to ratchet down on toxic air emissions from burning coal and set much-needed limits on carbon pollution from power plants.”

Ben Jealous, Executive Director of Sierra Club:

“Every single day, millions of Americans suffer under the weight of vehicle pollution, unsustainable gas prices, and the climate crisis, all fueled by tailpipe emissions spewing from gas cars throughout our communities. Today, President Biden, in one of the most significant actions his administration can take on climate change, has put forward standards with benefits extending far beyond reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The Biden Administration’s new clean car standards will save lives and money for families. And with investments from the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and the Inflation Reduction Act underway, these new standards will only further help US manufacturers in building American-made and union-built zero-emission vehicles.”

Steven Higashide, Union of Concerned Scientists:

“Today’s announcement will shift the trajectory of the automobile market and put us on a path to real emissions reductions, with an estimated 7.2 billion tons of global warming pollution avoided by 2055. These rules are the strongest standards ever finalized and vital for meeting US climate goals. This rule is technology-neutral and won’t mandate electric vehicles, but it will encourage this growing market. New cars sold in the coming years will be on the road for a decade or more, so it’s vital that these rules cut emissions from gasoline cars as well as encourage zero-emission electric cars. However, EPA should have gone even further because we have the technology to be more ambitious. The science is clear on both the urgent need to cut climate-endangering emissions and the fact that we can make the cuts we need. We don’t have many opportunities to reduce transportation pollution and it’s disappointing that this rule falls short of what’s possible. We’ll continue to push the administration to create, implement and enforce the strongest rules possible. These standards will help clean up emissions from transportation—the biggest source of global warming pollution in the US To achieve their full potential, these rules must be accompanied by other investments in a cleaner, more accessible transportation system. These investments—many of which are already underway—must build out charging infrastructure for electric vehicles, boost domestic manufacturing, put more renewable power on the electric grid, and expand transit, walking and bicycling options. We need to use every policy tool available to reduce the dangers of climate change and build the transportation system of the future.”

Melody Reis, Moms Clean Air Force, Senior Legislative and Regulatory Policy Manager:

“For far too long, cars and trucks have driven us towards a climate and health crisis. We don't have to keep going in that direction. It is far too dangerous. Today’s announcement will benefit families across the country, especially those living near highways and busy transportation corridors, who bear the brunt of the effects of toxic tailpipe pollution every day, including increased rates of asthma and other respiratory illnesses. These safeguards are an investment in a more equitable future, in cleaner air, and a more stable climate. Moms Clean Air Force thanks EPA for taking this critical step toward a safer, healthier future, and will keep pushing for the progress our children deserve.”

Andre Delattre, Senior Vice President and Chief Operating Officer for Program for US PIRG Education Fund:

“We’ve come a long way from the horse and buggy days. Today’s consumers can choose from multiple models of clean, reliable electric cars that don’t pollute the air or require trips to the gas station. This new rule will help us realize the promise of modern vehicle technology to bring about a safer, healthier and more secure America.”

Lisa Frank, Executive Director of Environment America Research & Policy Center’s Washington office:

“For decades, the convenience promised by cars came at a high price to Americans’ health and the environment: air pollution choking our cities, asthma threatening our kids and an ever-warming climate. In 2024, it’s possible to power our cars, buses and even pickup trucks with clean electricity. A brighter future without dirty tailpipes is within reach and we applaud the Biden administration for helping to achieve it through investments in EV charging, tax credits and today’s actions.”

Dan Lashof, Director, United States, World Resources Institute:

“These new standards will speed the adoption of cleaner, more efficient vehicles across America’s roads and go a long way to ensuring that all Americans can access the benefits of electric vehicles. The standards will have a direct impact on Americans’ lives, improving air quality, cutting people’s transportation costs and reducing climate pollution. Today transportation contributes more to the climate crisis than any other sector in the United States. In 2023, Americans purchased a record 1.2 million electric vehicles thanks, in part, to the consumer tax credits established by the Inflation Reduction Act. Investments in new electric vehicle manufacturing facilities are sprouting up across the nation, creating good jobs and boosting local economies. We look forward to the final standards for heavy duty vehicles later this spring and urge federal and state policymakers to defend these standards from attack while continuing to advance additional policies to cut vehicle pollution and make the benefits of electric vehicles available to all Americans.”

Darien Davis, LCV Government Affairs Advocate for Climate & Clean Energy:

“We applaud the Biden-Harris Administration for finalizing cleaner cars rules that advance climate, jobs, and justice. The final rule will slash billions of tons of climate pollution and protect the health of families across the country — particularly those in communities living near busy roads and highways. This rule, in combination with the DOE’s Petroleum Equivalency Factor and the hundreds of billions of dollars the Biden-Harris administration has delivered in their affordable clean energy plan, will help to supercharge low and zero-emission vehicle innovation and manufacturing across the country — boosting good family-sustaining jobs and decreasing tailpipe pollution. ”

Michael Kodransky, Senior Director of Transportation at Ceres:

“We applaud the finalized EPA standards that will help ensure the US is on track to achieve its climate goals. Stronger vehicle emission standards will reduce pollution, save lives and improve air quality across the country, especially in communities located near highways and busy roads, and bring significant economic benefits. These standards will position the US to continue attracting investment to build and deploy clean vehicles and infrastructure with good-paying careers in communities across America. Going forward, Ceres is committed to working with the private sector, as well as state and federal policymakers, to accelerate the transition to zero-emission vehicles in the clean transportation future.”

Nsedu Obot Witherspoon, Executive Director of the Children's Environmental Health Network:

"American children across the country are facing the catastrophic impacts of climate change as well as the health impacts of tailpipe pollution. This is especially true for children in Black and brown communities and communities with lower wealth, who live or attend school or child care near highways and transportation hubs, and who are disproportionately exposed to additional sources of pollution. These children are hit first and worst by these exposures and by climate impacts, and they suffer severe health and economic impacts. With today’s adoption of final Cleaner Cars Standards, the EPA and the Biden Administration are providing another Solution for Pollution that will help protect our children and future generations.”

Ann Mesnikoff, Federal Legislative Director, Environmental Law & Policy Center:

“The Environmental Law & Policy Center welcomes the Biden administration’s new climate and air pollution standards for light-duty and medium-duty vehicles as an essential step toward slashing the emissions driving the climate crisis and harming public health. We are already seeing the impacts of a changing climate across the Great Lakes region and air pollution from transportation continues to impact communities. These new standards for light and medium-duty vehicles for model years 2027 to 2032 continue to move us toward pollution-free vehicles, from cars to SUVs to pickups and delivery vans. EPA’s new strong standards will ensure new car buyers in those years will have increasingly cleaner choices that will also save them money, cut demand for oil, and lead to a safer climate and cleaner air for communities. We need strong actions to protect the climate and avert the worst-case scientific assessments. Climate simply cannot wait. We appreciate the importance of these standards given that transportation is the largest source of climate pollution, however, we must also take a bolder approach to reducing pollution from transportation through robust investments in passenger rail and public transit, and safe biking and walking. We also look forward to EPA issuing strong greenhouse gas standards for heavy-duty trucks and power plants. These rules, along with new standards for methane pollution from the oil and gas industry, will together help deliver important climate action.”

Members of Congress

Senator Debbie Stabenow (MI):

“I’ve always said Michigan automakers are the best in the world. And this is their moment. I appreciate EPA’s commitment to engaging with our automakers and autoworkers to develop an ambitious but achievable final rule. It represents an opportunity for union workers to continue to build the vehicles of the future right here in the US and tackle the climate crisis.”

Congresswoman Debbie Dingell (MI-06):

“My priority will always be to protect American jobs and our environment, keep the United States at the forefront of automotive manufacturing, technology, and innovation, and keep our domestic industry strong and competitive. The EPA has worked with all stakeholders to reach this final rule that includes hybrid and electric vehicles, and ensure these goals are achievable. It’s important to protect vehicle choice – the number of available models has doubled in the last three years, and in the last year sticker prices are down 20%. We need to continue to work on making sure that these vehicles are affordable to everyone, that we have the infrastructure in place to make them accessible and practical for consumers, and bring jobs back to the US The bottom line is that the future of the industry must be created in America and driven by American workers, and we are all committed to working together toward that future.”

As part of the Biden-Harris Administration’s commitment to cut methane pollution that threatens the climate and public health, the EPA and State Department officials, along with the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, convened a group of 450 global leaders at the 2024 Global Methane Forum this week. The Global Methane Forum provides an opportunity for members of the Global Methane Initiative, participants of the Global Methane Pledge and others to share successful actions, discuss next steps, and learn from peers and technical experts. GMI and UNECE co-hosted the 2024 Forum in partnership with the Global Methane Hub and the Climate and Clean Air Coalition.1

“This event marks the Global Methane Initiative’s 20th anniversary as a global public-private partnership that, since 2004, has led the way on advancing technical understanding to reduce methane, a potent greenhouse gas that contributes about one-third of today’s warming,” said Tomás Carbonell, Deputy Assistant Administrator of the EPA’s Office of Air and Radiation and Chair of GMI. “GMI has created networks of people around the world who can act on methane and achieve ambitious reductions. We are grateful to see the world rallying behind this important effort as we know that together we can mobilize greater methane action.”

At the 2024 Global Methane Forum, the US, and representatives from more than 50 other countries highlighted actions taken by national and international policy makers and the private sector to reduce methane emissions. Over 30 specific projects and activities were showcased as examples for countries to emulate in addressing methane, including the EPA’s recent historic oil and gas regulations under the Clean Air Act.

“Methane is the fastest way to reduce near term warming and essential to keep 1.5 degrees within reach,” said Rick Duke, Deputy Special Envoy for Climate. “GMI has led the way in demonstrating how to reduce methane across sectors and laid a foundation to achieve the Global Methane Pledge goal of reducing emissions 30% by 2030.”

GMI plays a critical role in advancing technical understanding that advances the ambitious global methane reduction targets of 30% by 2030, under the Global Methane Pledge. GMI has enabled the EPA to forge strong bilateral and multilateral collaboration with other countries, including India and China, in the effort to reduce methane emissions as quickly as possible.

Global Methane Initiative

In 2004 the EPA and the State Department launched the Global Methane Initiative (then known as the Methane to Markets Partnership) along with 14 countries and leading industry groups. There are 49 GMI Partner countries today.

In support of the Global Methane Initiative, an international public-private partnership committed to addressing methane, the US has fostered global collaboration and sharing on methane mitigation strategies, providing technical assistance, building capacity, and hosting eight GMI Global Methane Forums and Expos in five different countries and virtually.

Through the Global Methane Initiative, the EPA spearheads technical collaboration and innovation that leads to methane emissions reductions across key sectors including oil and gas, coal mining, municipal solid waste, agricultural manure management, and municipal wastewater. The EPA’s work has demonstrated the technical effectiveness, commercial availability, and economic benefits of projects that convert waste methane into useful energy. The EPA’s technical leadership has been a critical element in the success of this initiative, based on successful legacy domestic public-private partnerships like the Natural Gas STAR partnership and the Landfill Methane Outreach Program.

Since 2004, the EPA, with funding and support from the Department of State, has developed technical assessments, best practices, technical guidance, and tools, and provided training to more than 50,000 people across 70 countries. EPA has hosted the Secretariat of the GMI since its launch, organizing meetings, workshops, and trainings, and managing communications to build partner countries’ capacity to address methane. GMI efforts have led to implementation of innovative projects and efforts such as the world’s largest coal mine methane recovery project, the World Bank’s innovative Pilot Auction Facility for Methane and Climate, deployment of pioneering technologies to reduce methane emissions from coal mine ventilation shafts, strengthened facility-specific emissions inventories in the oil and gas sector, and developed tools for the solid waste sector that have been used by more than 60 cities to assess methane reduction opportunities. These efforts through GMI have resulted in methane emissions reductions of more than 540 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent, equal to taking 115 million gasoline powered passenger vehicles off the road for a year. Every $1 invested by the United States in GMI leverages approximately $6 in investments from other stakeholders.

Global Methane Pledge

The Global Methane Pledge, launched at COP26 by the European Union and the United States, now has over 155 government participants representing over 50% of global anthropogenic methane emissions. Participants agree to take voluntary actions to contribute to a collective effort to reduce global methane emissions by at least 30% from 2020 levels by 2030. Since its launch, the GMP has generated unprecedented momentum for methane mitigation, with major work underway in six action areas including: the Energy Pathway, the Waste Pathway, the Food and Agriculture Pathway, Methane plans and policies, Data for Methane Action, and Finance for Methane Abatement. Meeting the GMP would reduce methane emissions to a level consistent with 1.5°C pathways while delivering significant benefits for human health, food security, and our economies such as preventing 26 million tons of crop losses, 255,000 premature deaths, 775,000 asthma-related hospitalizations and 73 billion hours of lost labor due to extreme heat annually. Learn more about the Global Methane Pledge.

Today, March 14, 2024, the US Environmental Protection Agency recognized 103 US manufacturing plants that earned the agency’s ENERGY STAR certification in 2023, a designation reserved for manufacturing plants in the top 25% of energy efficiency in their sector. Together, these plants prevented more than 8 million metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions, equivalent to the emissions from the electricity use of more than 1.5 million American homes.

“President Biden’s Investing in America agenda is breathing new life into energy efficient domestic manufacturing, and industry partners like those recognized today are leading the way,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “These ENERGY STAR certified plants demonstrate that cutting the embodied carbon of our industrial products through energy efficiency doesn’t just make environmental sense, it makes economic sense.”

The industrial sector accounts for 30% of US greenhouse emissions, primarily from energy use in manufacturing plants. ENERGY STAR certified plants have reduced their energy use through a variety of energy efficiency projects and management practices. For example:

Ardagh's Houston, Texas, container glass facility operated a highly efficient furnace, used recycled glass, and installed energy-efficient lighting fixtures, among other initiatives.
Bimbo Bakeries USA installed advanced controls and high-efficiency burners in ovens, oxidizers, and boilers and expanded investments in metering systems, enabling real-time monitoring and control of energy usage.
Ash Grove’s Seattle, Wash., cement plant saved energy by increasing the amount of limestone in its Portland Limestone cement, thereby reducing energy needed for clinker production, and improving equipment automation.
GCC's Rapid City, S.D., cement plant upgraded its preheater and improved kiln combustion efficiency. This plant and GCC’s Pueblo, Colo., cement plant integrated alternative fuels, lowering carbon dioxide emissions while maintaining high levels of energy efficiency.
J.R. Simplot Company’s Helm, Calif., nitrogenous fertilizer plant commissioned an on-site, one-megawatt solar photovoltaic project, reducing source energy consumption and avoiding greenhouse gas emissions.
Koch Fertilizer’s Beatrice, Neb., fertilizer plant reduced steam use and the number of continuously running pumps, while the Enid, Okla., plant improved steam utilization and implemented advanced process controls.
Marathon Petroleum Corporation’s Anacortes, Wash., refinery reduced steam trap failures by more than 20% by equipping operators with handheld trap-testing devices to instantly identify leaks. The St. Paul Park, Minn., refinery completed a three-year effort to reinforce insulation across the entire site, cutting carbon dioxide-equivalent emissions by close to 16,000 metric tons per year.
Nissan North America, Inc., replaced more than 20,000 light fixtures with LEDs across all US manufacturing sites and conducted a combination of energy treasure hunts and third-party assessments targeting energy efficiency.
Manufacturing plants use the EPA’s ENERGY STAR energy performance indicators or, in the case of petroleum refineries, the Solomon Associates Energy Intensity Index scoring system, to assess their energy performance. Plants that score at least 75 out of 100 — indicating that they are more energy efficient than 75% of similar facilities nationwide — are eligible to earn ENERGY STAR certification. ENERGY STAR certification is available for 21 manufacturing sectors, from cement and steel to glass and commercial bakeries. More than 270 plants have achieved ENERGY STAR certification since 2006.

Today, March 14, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced a rule that will reduce lifetime cancer risks for people living near commercial sterilization facilities across the country. The final amendments to the air toxics standards for ethylene oxide commercial sterilization facilities put in place the strongest measures in US history to reduce emissions of EtO, one of the most potent cancer-causing chemicals. Through the installation of proven and achievable air pollution controls, commercial sterilizers will reduce emissions by more than 90%.

This final rule advances President Biden’s commitment to ending cancer as we know it as part of the Cancer Moonshot, while also advancing the Biden-Harris Administration’s commitment to environmental justice by protecting communities that are most exposed to toxic chemicals. EtO can be particularly harmful to children and communities that are already overburdened by pollution.

In finalizing this rule, EPA considered the latest data and science, while taking into account the importance of a safe and reliable supply of medical sterilization devices for patients and hospitals. EPA worked closely with partners across the Biden-Harris Administration, including at the Department of Health and Human Services, to develop a final rule that centers on public health. This final rule provides sufficient time and flexibility for facilities to come into compliance, simultaneously affording strong public health protection for nearby communities while minimizing any potential impacts to the medical device supply chain.

“This final rule to sharply cut toxic emissions of ethylene oxide responds to the ambition set forth by President Biden’s Cancer Moonshot,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “We have followed the science and listened to communities to fulfill our responsibility to safeguard public health from this pollution – including the health of children, who are particularly vulnerable to carcinogens early in life. We’ve arrived at a historically strong rule that will protect the most exposed communities from toxic air pollution while also ensuring that there will be a process that safeguards our nation’s critical supply of sterilized medical equipment.”

“For years, I have called for environmental justice, urging protections for workers and fenceline communities from the dangers of EtO pollution,” said Xavier Becerra, United States Secretary of Health and Human Services. “We will continue to work together with EPA to achieve our shared goals of lowering EtO exposure while also mitigating potential risks of medical device shortages.”

In developing the final rule, EPA conducted extensive outreach to communities and stakeholders to ensure meaningful and extensive participation during the public comment period. EPA conducted public hearings, national webinars, and public meetings hosted by regional EPA offices. The considerable feedback received from the three days of public hearings, as well as the more than 40,000 comments submitted to the rulemaking docket, both informed the final rule and demonstrated the strong need to issue these vital health protections. Based on this input, EPA improved the risk assessment and strengthened the standards to ensure risk reductions for surrounding communities.

“I commend the EPA for finalizing regulations in a way that will reduce EtO emissions by more than 90% at facilities across the country,” said US Rep. Brad Schneider (IL-10). “I appreciate that the EPA followed the science to keep Americans safe while also ensuring safe, reliable supply chains for hospitals, physicians and patients. I have long fought for sensible regulations to address EtO air emissions and assist impacted communities. Today's regulations will rightly require continuous air monitoring to assure communities that the air they breathe is safe, as well as provide an on-ramp for facilities to comply so that we do not have to choose between safe air and a stable supply of medical products. I will continue to be an outspoken advocate for air monitoring in communities where sterilization facilities are present, and I will always fight to prevent harmful toxins from entering our air.”

The final rule will address emissions at nearly 90 commercial sterilization facilities that are owned and operated by approximately 50 companies. Based on extensive input and review, EPA is finalizing the following amendments to the National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants that:

Establish standards for currently unregulated emissions, such as building leaks (“room air emissions”) and chamber exhaust vents, to reduce cancer risk and account for technological developments in pollution control.
Strengthen standards that are on the books for sources such as sterilization chamber vents  and aeration room vents.
Require continuous emissions monitoring and quarterly reporting for most commercial sterilizers that will provide communities, states, Tribes, and local governments, and EPA with data to ensure EtO emissions are not entering the outdoor air.
Ensure that sterilizers are subject to emission standards during periods of startup, shutdown, and malfunction so there is continuous clean air protection.
Other clarifying items including electronic reporting and technical revisions.
The Biden-Harris Administration believes securing our supply of medical devices is essential. To prevent unintended consequences and ensure orderly implementation, the Clean Air Act has long provided backstop authority allowing the President to provide a two-year compliance exemption to assist a facility with achieving compliance with National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants in carefully delimited special circumstances — if the technology to implement the standard is not available and it is in the national security interest to provide additional time to comply. EPA has confirmed that the President is prepared to exercise this authority, if necessary to protect the medical supply chain and a commercial sterilizer is working in good faith to come into compliance with the rule.

This final rule for commercial sterilizers is one of a series of coordinated actions that EPA is taking to reduce exposure to EtO. Under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, EPA’s Office of Pesticide Programs is also working on a comprehensive set of new mitigation measures for EtO to reduce exposure for workers who use EtO to sterilize products. EPA has been working to support alignment of today’s Clean Air Act rule with the action being taken under FIFRA.

EPA is also working to strengthen standards to reduce EtO and other toxic pollutants from chemical plants. Other actions to address EtO emissions and advance EtO research include:

Investigating additional sources of EtO (e.g., stand-alone warehouses) and opportunities for emissions controls.
Enforcing existing regulations as appropriate.
Conducting research to better understand and measure EtO.

Today, March 14, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced nearly $1.2 million, in funding to 16 college student teams to research and develop innovative solutions that address environmental and public health challenges as part of the Agency’s People, Prosperity, and the Planet (P3) Program.

 EPA is pleased to mark the 20th anniversary of our P3 program by announcing this impressive round of projects that are tackling critical issues such as removing PFAS from water, combating harmful algal blooms, and materials recovery and reuse,” said Chris Frey, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Research and Development. “I commend these hardworking and creative students and look forward to seeing the results of their innovative projects that are addressing some of our thorniest sustainability and environmental challenges.”

EPA's P3 program features a unique competition that offers teams of college students hands-on experience to turn their creative design and engineering ideas into reality, while also helping solve real-world environmental challenges. The 16 recipients announced today will receive grants of up to $75,000 to fund a two-year project. Students will propose innovative and sustainable ideas and concepts and carry them through the research, design and demonstration stages. During the second year of the award, student teams will have the opportunity to showcase their designs at EPA’s National Student Design Expo.

Today, March 14, 2024, the US Environmental Protection Agency is announcing its action to reduce toxic air pollution from gasoline distribution facilities, including storage tanks, loading operations and equipment leaks. These rules, which exclude gas stations, are expected to reduce emissions of air toxics, including benzene, hexane, toluene, and xylene, by 2,220 tons per year, and emissions of volatile organic compounds by 45,400 tons per year.

“These rules will protect public health for communities near gas distribution facilities, which are disproportionately communities of color and low-income communities,” said Joseph Goffman, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Air and Radiation. “By helping to reduce exposures to toxic air emissions, these actions will help communities breathe cleaner air, improving lives in communities already overburdened by pollution.”

People exposed to toxic air pollutants may have an increased chance of getting cancer or experiencing other serious health effects within their lifetimes. These health effects can include damage to the immune system, as well as neurological, reproductive, developmental, respiratory and other health problems. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) can have short- and long-term adverse health effects, and evaporated VOCs can react in the atmosphere to produce secondary pollutants, including ozone and secondary organic aerosol, a contributor to fine particles, or soot.

The air toxics emitted by Gasoline Distribution sources are benzene, hexane, toluene, xylene, ethylbenzene, 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, cumene and napthalene.

For the final rule, EPA has considered input received during the public comment period and made several adjustments to enhance environmental protection while ensuring no significant impacts on small businesses or gas prices. 

This action will require gasoline distribution facilities to adopt cost-effective practices and control technologies to reduce emissions from storage tanks, loading operations, and equipment leaks. EPA is also finalizing New Source Performance Standards for Bulk Gasoline Terminals to reflect the best system of emissions reduction for loading operations and equipment leaks. Because the rules will reduce air emissions, such as leaks at these facilities, EPA projects that some of these reductions will result in annualized cost savings—a win-win for companies, consumers, and environmental justice communities. The final action includes revisions related to emissions during periods of startup, shutdown, and malfunction; monitoring and operating provisions for control devices; and electronic reporting.
Today, March 11, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced a record 45 states, plus the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and dozens of Metropolitan Statistical Areas have now developed climate action plans through investments made possible by President Biden’s Investing in America agenda. The planning process is supported by EPA’s Climate Pollution Reduction Grants program, which offers a unique opportunity to help state and local governments develop strategies to reduce harmful pollution and address environmental justice concerns, while building the infrastructure, industry, and competitive economy for a clean energy future. Together, over 96% of the US population is covered by these plans.

The Climate Pollution Reduction Grants program created under the Inflation Reduction Act — the largest climate investment in history — is enabling community-driven solutions to the climate crisis and helping accelerate America’s clean energy transition. The program is covered under President Biden’s Justice40 Initiative, which set the goal that 40% of the overall benefits of certain federal climate, clean energy, and other investments flow to disadvantaged communities that are marginalized by underinvestment and overburdened by pollution.

In 2023, under the first phase of the $5 billion program, EPA made a total of $250 million in grants available to 45 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, 80 MSAs, four territories, and over 200 Tribes and Tribal consortia to develop ambitious climate action plans that address greenhouse gas emissions across their communities and economies.

“The diversity of ideas and ambitious initiatives from all across the country reflect the seriousness that states and metropolitan areas are bringing to the work of cutting pollution, acting on climate change, and meeting their local objectives,” said Jennifer Macedonia, Deputy Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Air and Radiation. “These climate action plans demonstrate substantial progress for states and local governments, in coordination with their communities, to chart their path forward — building healthy communities and competitive local economies where climate solutions can thrive.”

As part of the deliverables due under the initial $250 million planning phase of the program, grantees were provided resources to develop and submit Priority Climate Action Plans focused on high-priority, implementation-ready actions to reduce GHG emissions that were due for states and large metropolitan areas on March 1. Although Tribal and territory PCAPs are due April 1, EPA has already received 19 plans from Tribes.

Each grantee can align the measures selected for the PCAP with their jurisdiction’s unique priorities and interests while prioritizing measures that can benefit low-income and disadvantaged communities. For many states and metro areas, PCAPs are their first climate action plans. For others, the PCAPs build on existing climate action plans and work undertaken over many years.

In addition to addressing climate pollution, these grants can also support efforts to:

Help businesses capitalize on new opportunities, spur economic growth and create jobs by supporting new industries, and developing training programs to prepare workers.
Ensure communities, particularly low-income and disadvantaged communities, have a seat at the table, help define solutions, and benefit from their implementation.
Gain substantial public health co-benefits through the simultaneous reduction of criteria.
The submitted PCAPs lay the groundwork for the second phase of the CPRG program: $4.6 billion in competitive implementation grants that planning grant recipients and other eligible entities can use to fund GHG reduction measures contained within the PCAPs. PCAPs also help prepare states and metro areas for accessing a broader set of funding opportunities, including other programs under the Investing in America agenda.

All planning grant recipients will also develop Comprehensive Climate Action Plans (due in the second half of 2025 for most grantees), which will include a broader suite of GHG reduction measures from all key emitting sectors – electric power, transportation, commercial and residential buildings, industry, agriculture/natural and working lands, and waste and materials management. The comprehensive plans will also contain GHG emissions projections and reduction targets, air quality and health benefits information, and workforce planning assessments. EPA is committed to providing grant recipients with technical support, tools, and other resources throughout the planning process.

Together, the CPRG planning grants and competitive implementation funding will support the deployment of technologies to reduce GHG emissions and other harmful pollution across the country, facilitate the transition to a low-carbon economy, and advance environmental justice by prioritizing benefits to communities.

Today, March 4, 2024, Michael Hart of San Diego was arrested and charged with smuggling greenhouse gases into the United States from Mexico and then selling them for profit, in violation of regulations intended to curb the use of greenhouse gases and slow climate change.

This is the first prosecution in the United States to include charges related to the American Innovation and Manufacturing Act of 2020 (AIM Act). The AIM Act prohibits the importation of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), commonly used as refrigerants, without allowances issued by the US Environmental Protection Agency.

“The illegal smuggling of hydrofluorocarbons, a highly potent greenhouse gas, undermines international efforts to combat climate change under the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol,” said David M. Uhlmann, EPA Assistant Administrator for the Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “Anyone who seeks to profit from illegal actions that worsen climate change must be held accountable. This arrest highlights the significance of EPA’s climate enforcement initiative and our efforts to prevent refrigerants that are climate super pollutants from illegally entering the United States.”

“It is illegal to import certain refrigerants into the United States because of their documented and significantly greater contribution to climate change,” said Assistant Attorney General Todd Kim of the Justice Department’s Environment and Natural Resources Division. “We are committed to enforcing the AIM Act and other laws that seek to prevent environmental harm.”

“This office is at the forefront of environmental prosecutions, and today is a significant milestone for our country,” said US Attorney Tara McGrath. “This is the first time the Department of Justice is prosecuting someone for illegally importing greenhouse gases, and it will not be the last. We are using every means possible to protect our planet from the harm caused by toxic pollutants, including bringing criminal charges.”

According to the EPA, HFCs are potent greenhouse gases that cause climate change and are used in applications such as refrigeration, air-conditioning, building foam insulation, fire extinguishing systems, and aerosols. The global warming potential of an HFC can be hundreds to thousands of times more potent than carbon dioxide. The use of HFCs has been rapidly increasing worldwide due to the global phaseout of ozone-depleting substances and increased demand for refrigeration and air conditioning. The 2016 Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer is an international agreement to phase down the production and consumption of HFCs by 80-85 percent by 2047.

The indictment alleges that Hart purchased refrigerants in Mexico and smuggled them into the United States in his vehicle, concealed under a tarp and tools. According to the indictment, Hart posted the refrigerants for sale on OfferUp, Facebook Marketplace, and other sites, and sold them for a profit. In addition to greenhouse gases, the indictment alleges Hart imported HCFC-22, an ozone-depleting substance regulated under the Clean Air Act.

The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (Montreal Protocol) is a treaty adopted in 1987 and ratified by virtually every country. The Montreal Protocol required the gradual phase out of ozone-depleting substances, with different timetables for developed countries like the United States and developing countries like Mexico. In the United States, the Montreal Protocol is being implemented under the Clean Air Act: Stratospheric Ozone Protection, which identifies HCFC-22 as a regulated ozone-depleting substance. Before 2020, EPA regulations that governed ozone-depleting substances made it illegal for anyone to import a regulated ozone-depleting substance in an amount exceeding that individual’s consumption allowance, subject to certain exceptions. Consumption allowances for HCFC-22 were eliminated on Jan. 1, 2020, and it became illegal to import HCFC-22 for any purpose other than for use in a process resulting in their transformation or their destruction.

The Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol is designed to phase down the production and consumption of greenhouse gases such as HFCs, which are commonly used alternatives to ozone-depleting substances that are already controlled under the Montreal Protocol and the Clean Air Act. The AIM Act authorized the EPA to phase down the production and consumption of HFCs in a stepwise manner by 85% by 2036. As part of the AIM Act, Congress added an additional list of regulated substances, which include HFC-32, HFC-125, HFC-134a, and HFC-143a. Refrigerants marketed as HFC- or R-404A, -407A, -407C and -410A contain these regulated substances. The listed HFCs are some of the most commonly used HFCs and all are saturated, meaning they have only a single bond between their atoms and therefore have longer atmospheric lifetimes than other substitutes such as hydrofluoroolefins. Beginning on Jan. 1, 2022, EPA regulations prohibit any person from importing bulk regulated HFCs, except by expending, at the time of import, a consumption or application-specific allowance issued by the EPA. No person may sell or distribute, or offer for sale or distribution, any regulated HFC that was imported illegally.

EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan issued the following statement today on EPA’s approach to the power sector:

“As EPA works towards final standards to cut climate pollution from existing coal and new gas-fired power plants later this spring, the Agency is taking a new, comprehensive approach to cover the entire fleet of natural gas-fired turbines, as well as cover more pollutants including climate, toxic and criteria air pollution,” said Administrator Regan.

“This stronger, more durable approach will achieve greater emissions reductions than the current proposal. EPA proposals on criteria pollutants and air toxics also will help address local air quality impacts to better protect vulnerable frontline communities. This comprehensive approach to reducing climate and air pollution will also consider flexibilities to support grid operators and will recognize that ongoing technological innovation offers a wide range of decarbonization options. EPA will immediately begin a robust stakeholder engagement process, working with workers, communities with environmental justice concerns, and all interested parties to help create a more durable, flexible, and affordable proposal that protects public health and the environment.”

Additional Background

The final rules that EPA will send to OMB soon will protect public health, reduce harmful pollutants, and deliver billions of dollars in climate and public health benefits. These final rules will cover existing coal-fired power plants that continue to be among the largest source of greenhouse gas emissions from the power sector, while ensuring that new natural gas turbines are clean. EPA received more than 1.3 million comments and had extensive and productive discussions with many groups of stakeholders to develop effective and workable climate standards that follow the law and are based on available and cost-effective technologies.

What They Are Saying

Washington Governor Jay Inslee:

“This is excellent news from Administrator Regan, and I commend him for his continued leadership. We cannot mitigate emissions and pollution from power plants by ignoring our country’s largest source of electricity generation: existing gas plants. Washington state is eager to support EPA in undertaking this rulemaking as quickly as possible.”

Illinois Senator Tammy Duckworth:

“I applaud the Biden Administration for once again prioritizing the inclusion of environmental justice communities into the rule making process. These ambitious GHG reductions will help benefit the communities that have been most impacted by toxic emissions, and Administrator Regan understands they must be at the table to inform these decisions as we shift to a greener tomorrow for all.”

Representative Kathy Castor:

“I commend the EPA for moving forward with historic power plant emissions rules that will reduce air pollution and save lives. Section 111 of the Clean Air Act (CAA) requires EPA to protect Americans from air pollution sources that endanger the public, and to listen to workers, frontline communities, and other stakeholders as it develops rules. EPA is making substantial progress after starting from scratch—following former President Trump’s roll back of air quality rules at the behest of polluters and the fossil fuel industry. Cleaner, cheaper energy is America’s future. And I look forward to working with EPA on new rules for existing gas-fired power plants so that Americans can breathe easier and avoid the worst consequences and growing costs of the climate crisis.”

Abigail Dillen, president of Earthjustice:

“Moving forward with standards for existing coal plants and new gas plants will address two burning priorities. Tackling dirty coal plants is one of the single most important moves the president and EPA can make to rein in climate pollution. As utilities propose new fossil gas plants, we absolutely have to get ahead of a big new pollution problem.”

Peggy Shepard, Co-Founder and Executive Director of WE ACT for Environmental Justice:

“We are pleased to see that the voices and considerations of environmental justice communities are being factored into this monumentally impactful area of environmental rulemaking. The EPA has a responsibility to our communities and to our future - the power sector is one of the top sources of carbon emissions and pollution - we have a limited amount of time to not only create an energy transition but also to do it the right way with clean and renewable sources and communities in mind. With this pause to take a deeper dive into developing the most comprehensive and thoughtful rulemaking for existing gas plants, we have an opportunity to do this work correctly and effectively to protect the human and environmental health of the most overburdened, neglected, and vulnerable people across the country - which in turn benefits everyone. We are wholly appreciative of the EPA’s leadership in demonstrating the need for further review, and at the same time request a clear and transparent process as we look forward to collaborating for its improved realization. Only when this rule is finalized can we truly know we are on a path to resilience and justice. Our movement being recognized and included in the EPA’s process will indeed create a world in which we don’t have to dare to breathe, but instead live and breathe more easily today and tomorrow.”

Dr. Beverly Wright, Founder and Executive Director of the Deep South Center for Environmental Justice:

“We are grateful to have EPA’s leadership to reduce power plant pollution in a way that is protective of nearby communities. Power plants are disproportionately located near Black and other communities of color, and release massive amounts of pollution that cause asthma and contribute to climate change. Allowing these existing plants to employ carbon capture and storage or hydrogen co-firing would increase health risks and set back progress on renewable energy. We look forward to participating in regulations for existing power plants that advance environmental and climate justice.”

Dr. Robert D. Bullard, Distinguished Professor of Urban Planning and Environmental Policy and Director of the Bullard Center for Environmental and Climate Justice at Texas Southern University:

"We applaud EPA for taking an important step toward mitigating pollution from the fossil fuel power generation sector, and we implore the agency to go further down this path. Curtailing pollution is of the utmost urgency as communities of color and low-wealth struggle under the weight of historical and continued pollution and injustice. We call on the EPA to continue enacting anti-racist policies that result in real justice for real people. We don’t need any false solutions like hydrogen and carbon capture that will add to the pollution burden that already exists in our communities. Instead, we need only those solutions that improve environmental conditions for the most vulnerable people."

Dr. Ana Baptista, Co-Director of the Tishman Environment & Design Center at The New School and Associate Professor at The New School University:

"US EPA’s decision to address existing natural gas plants in a supplemental rulemaking process is a critical opportunity to take up the substantive environmental justice concerns voiced by communities in the comment period. A large majority of natural gas plants contribute to the existing, disproportionate burdens already faced by environmental justice communities. This decision allows for a more comprehensive approach to tackling both climate change and the cumulative impacts that these plants pose to overburdened communities."

Dr. Nicky Sheats, Ph.D, MPP, Esq., Director, Center for the Urban Environment at the John S. Watson Institute for Urban Policy and Research at Kean University:

“In addition to fighting climate change, climate change mitigation policy should be used to improve the health of communities by improving local air quality. Re-considering the portion of the power plants rule that applies to existing natural gas plants will provide EPA with more opportunity to ensure that overburdened environmental justice communities are not sacrificed as the nation fights climate change. We need to make sure the rule does, in fact, improve local air quality in these communities and does not make it worse.”

Rev. Lennox Yearwood, Jr., President and CEO, Hip Hop Caucus:

"The rule as proposed did not address the concerns of environmental justice communities. Therefore, it is encouraging to see the EPA and Biden Administration pause to reflect on environmental justice needs rather than push out regulations that do not address the climate crisis, as it is a racial justice matter. We look forward to continuing to engage on this existing gas plant rule and others to ensure community concerns are uplifted and harmful impacts are addressed.”

Maria Lopez-Nuñez, Deputy Director, Organizing and Advocacy, Ironbound Community Corporation:

"Environmental Justice communities can breathe a little bit easier with this delay in the release of the ‘New Source Performance Standards for Greenhouse Gas Emissions from New, Modified, and Reconstructed Fossil Fuel–Fired Electric Generating Units (EGU); Emissions Guidelines for Greenhouse Gas Emissions From Existing Fossil Fuel–Fired Electric Generating Units.’ We are hopeful that this delay will allow a reconsideration that fully embraces Environmental Justice in order to ensure healthy outcomes for our communities."

Melissa Miles, Executive Director, New Jersey Environmental Justice Alliance:

“Delaying the existing natural gas plants part of the power plants rule will give EPA a better opportunity to make sure the rule helps environmental justice communities in their fight to improve local air quality. There needs to be protections in the rule to ensure that environmental justice communities already overburdened by air pollution are not further burdened by this rule.”

Today, Feb. 28, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced the launch of the $3 billion Clean Ports Program to fund zero-emission port equipment and infrastructure to tackle the climate crisis and improve air quality at US ports as part of President Biden’s Investing in America agenda. The funding opportunities were created under President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act — the largest climate investment in history — and will advance environmental justice by reducing diesel pollution from US ports in surrounding communities, while creating good-paying jobs. EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan made this announcement at an event in Wilmington, North Carolina with Governor Roy Cooper today as part of the Biden-Harris Administration’s Investing in America tour.

“Our nation’s ports are among the busiest in the world, helping us to create good jobs here in America, move goods, and grow our economy,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “Today’s historic funding announcement reflects President Biden’s vision of growing our economy while ensuring America leads in creating globally competitive solutions of the future. Today we’re making $3 billion available to install cleaner and more efficient technologies while cutting air pollution to protect the people who work at and live near ports.”

“Our country’s ports feed our supply chains to put food on our tables, keep our businesses running and provide for our everyday needs,” said Governor Roy Cooper. “We are deeply grateful to the Biden Administration for the investments that have helped fix our supply chain, rebuild our infrastructure and create thousands of good paying clean energy jobs.”

“Communities living near America’s ports have borne the brunt of some of the worst air pollution coming from shipping, trucking, and maritime industries,” said John Podesta, Senior Advisor to the President for International Climate Policy. “Today’s historic announcement from EPA is an investment in a cleaner, healthier future for those communities.”

“President Biden and Vice President Harris believe every person deserves clean air, clean water, and a healthy environment. Communities near our nation’s ports are disproportionately impacted by air pollution and other environmental hazards, and this funding will help reduce emissions while creating good-paying jobs as we transition to a clean energy future,” said White House Council on Environmental Quality Chair Brenda Mallory. “Today’s announcement will help ensure families who live, work, and play near our ports have cleaner air to breathe and a healthier environment as we work to advance the President’s ambitious environmental justice agenda.”

“For decades, ports have been hubs of pollution — but thanks to President Biden, we are turning them into hubs of American innovation,” said Assistant to the President and National Climate Advisor Ali Zaidi. “There’s an incredible array of new technologies that can make ports cleaner and greener, all while creating good-paying jobs and strengthening American supply chains. The Clean Ports Program is demonstrating how these technologies can work together to deliver clean air for our children, cut down on harmful climate pollution, and achieve fully zero-emission operations. That’s a gamechanger for port communities, for workers, and for America’s economy. That’s environmental justice – long overdue.”

The Clean Ports Program will help advance the President’s commitment to environmental justice and the Justice40 Initiative, which sets the goal that 40% of the overall benefits of certain federal investments in climate, clean energy, and other areas flow to disadvantaged communities that are marginalized by underinvestment and overburdened by pollution. In addition to these efforts, EPA strived to ensure that near-port community engagement and equity considerations are at the forefront of our program design, including by evaluating applications on the extent and quality of community engagement efforts.

The Clean Ports Program is designed to help ports across the country transition to fully zero-emissions operations — serving as a catalyst for transformational change across the freight sector. To achieve this, EPA is releasing two separate Notice of Funding Opportunities (NOFOs) as part of the $3 billion. The nearly $2.8 billion Zero-Emission Technology Deployment Competition will directly fund zero-emission port equipment and infrastructure to reduce mobile source emissions at US ports. Eligible uses of funding include human-operated and maintained zero-emission cargo handling equipment, harbor craft and other vessels, electric charging and hydrogen fueling infrastructure, and a number of other technology investments. Applications under this competition will be evaluated under multiple tiers in order to ensure that funds are distributed across ports of different sizes and types, and to ensure funding for ports serving Tribal communities.

The approximately $150 million Climate and Air Quality Planning Competition will fund climate and air quality planning activities at US ports — including emissions inventories, strategy analysis, community engagement, and resiliency measure identification. Together, these opportunities will advance next-generation, clean technologies that will more safely and efficiently drive the movement of goods and passengers at our nation’s ports, a critical part of America’s supply chain infrastructure while reducing pollution and advancing environmental justice.

The funding for the two grant competitions is available to port authorities; state, regional, local, or Tribal agencies that have jurisdiction over a port authority or port; air pollution control agencies; and private entities that apply in partnership with an eligible entity above, and that own, operate or use facilities, cargo-handling equipment, transportation equipment, or related technology of a port. The funding can be used for projects at water ports (coastal and inland) as well as projects at facilities where goods are transferred between rail cars and trucks (dry ports).

Ports are the transportation and commerce hubs that make the US economy hum. In our global economy, efficient and effective ports are central to our economic viability and prosperity. At the same time, they are places where large concentrations of diesel equipment converge — including ships, trucks, rail, and non-road machinery. These diesel engines, particularly older engines found in many ports, operate near where people live, work, and play, emitting air pollution that can harm human health and contribute to climate change. This historic investment in clean technologies at ports that reduce exposure to air pollution will protect public health, particularly for communities surrounding ports. The Clean Ports Program will also help to ensure that meaningful community engagement and emissions reduction planning are port industry standard practices.

The new program builds on the success of EPA’s Ports Initiative and the Diesel Emissions Reduction Act programs, which have invested over $196 million to implement 207 diesel emissions reduction projects at ports with an additional $88 million to multi-sector projects that involve ports. Using the Ports Initiative and DERA’s strong foundation as a launchpad, the Clean Ports Program will drive transformational change across the freight sector. This new Clean Ports Program is one of several complementary programs funded by the Inflation Reduction Act and Bipartisan Infrastructure Law that can help reduce emissions at ports, including the Department of Transportation’s Port Infrastructure Development Program, which will be releasing a NOFO shortly. Visit a new interagency webpage summarizing federal funding opportunities for low- to zero-emission port technologies.

In addition to protecting human health and the environment, the program will create new jobs in the domestic clean energy sector and enhance US economic competitiveness, through innovation, installation, maintenance, and operation of zero-emissions equipment and infrastructure. The program’s historic investment in zero-emission port technology will promote and ensure the US position as a global leader in clean technologies.

The deadline to apply for the two Clean Ports Program NOFOs is May 28. Eligible applicants can apply for funding through one or both NOFOs.

Today, Feb. 27, 2024, the US Department of Justice filed a complaint on behalf of the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) against Ace Black Ranches LLP of Bruneau, Idaho, alleging significant violations of the Clean Water Act affecting the Bruneau River in Idaho.

The complaint, filed in the US District Court for the District of Idaho, alleges that Ace Black Ranches illegally discharged fill material to the Bruneau River and adjacent wetlands, significantly threatening fisheries, neighboring properties and downstream communities. The illegal activities include mining and processing gravel extracted from the river and using heavy equipment to clear and level dozens of acres of wetlands – all without permits required by the Clean Water Act.

“The complaint in this case alleges that Ace Black1 Ranches treated the Bruneau River and state-owned wetlands along the river as private property that could be damaged or destroyed for sand and gravel mining, without any effort to comply with the requirements of the Clean Water Act that protects our Nation’s waters from such abuses,” said Assistant Administrator David M. Uhlmann for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “EPA will hold companies accountable when they seek to profit from conducting illegal activities in American rivers and streams, destroying adjacent wetlands that protect those waters from pollution, and threatening fisheries, neighboring properties, and downstream communities.”

“Wetlands play critical roles in our ecosystems and serve as buffers to climate change,” said Casey Sixkiller, Regional Administrator of EPA’s Region 10 office in Seattle. “Enforcement actions like this are clear reminders that EPA and its federal and state partners will enforce the law to protect increasingly valuable and fragile water resources that we all hold in common and rely upon.”

During inspections of the property, review of historical aerial imagery and through other available information, representatives from EPA observed and documented sand and gravel mining, processing and hauling equipment located on the site; heavy machinery tracks and evidence of mechanical scraping, pushing or pulling, in and next to the Bruneau River and adjacent wetlands; and large piles of sand and gravel near the Bruneau River, along its banks and in adjacent wetlands. EPA representatives also collected evidence of wetland clearing, grading and filling to install and operate center-pivot irrigation systems at the property, construction of roads in the Bruneau River and adjacent wetlands, and placing fill material in the river and along its banks.

The complaint alleges that all these activities were unauthorized and caused significant damage to fish and wildlife habitat in and adjacent to the Bruneau River, including at land owned by the state of Idaho within the C.J. Strike Wildlife Management Area, which provides hunting, fishing and wildlife viewing opportunities.

EPA first learned of the alleged violations via a complaint from a member of the public to the state of Idaho regarding roads built across the Bruneau River.

The Bruneau River and its adjacent wetlands are considered "waters of the United States" and are subject to protection under the Clean Water Act. Activities that discharge pollutants to rivers and the adjacent wetlands require Clean Water Act permits.

Today, Feb. 26, 2024, the Environmental Protection Agency, US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) announced two complementary agreements to further their “whole of government” approach to strengthen these agencies’ shared work in ensuring that children, especially those at high risk, are not exposed to human health risks from lead hazards.

These two Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) support commitments made in the Lead and Paint Action Plan, EPA’s Strategic Plan , HUD’s Strategic Plan, and HHS’s Strategic Plan, which seek to reduce lead exposures locally with a focus on underserved communities and promote environmental justice through a whole of government approach.

The first MOU expands, updates and reaffirms a 1997 agreement between EPA and HUD to coordinate their enforcement efforts addressing lead-based paint hazards in housing.

“EPA is committed to working with our federal partners to protect children from the harmful effects of lead poisoning, which remains far too prevalent in communities across America,” said David M. Uhlmann, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “Today’s agreement demonstrates that EPA and HUD will enforce the law fairly and aggressively to protect children, particularly those living in overburdened and underserved communities, from exposure to lead-based paint in their homes.”

“With this agreement, we will collaborate across the federal government to enforce the laws that aim to ensure the healthy housing future that American children deserve,” said Matthew Ammon, Director of HUD’s Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes. “HUD is proud to join our federal partners at EPA to better align our enforcement efforts and ensure that we are protecting families – especially families with limited resources – from lead-based paint hazards in their home.”

The second MOU, signed by EPA, HUD and CDC launches a pilot program in the agencies’ Region 3, which includes Delaware, the District of Columbia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia, to facilitate information sharing about communities with high blood lead levels or higher lead exposure risks, to help them focus their respective and collaborative efforts working in communities with the greatest risks. The agencies plan to use the knowledge gained from the pilot to expand the scope of this effort.

“Our three agencies will work together to identify, reach, and assist communities most at risk from exposure to lead,” said EPA Mid-Atlantic Regional Administrator Adam Ortiz. “Through this pilot program, we will develop more effective processes for sharing actionable information on lead exposure, with the goal of alleviating the negative health impacts that still burden too many people across our region.”

“HUD is pleased to collaborate with its EPA and CDC partners on this pilot that we hope will provide the basis for an enhanced national framework for sharing and using information on the sources of lead exposures at the community and even neighborhood levels,” said Ammon. “HUD has a particular interest in using the shared data to facilitate its engagement with state and local lead hazard control programs, healthy homes programs, and housing rehabilitation programs, for the purposes of improving its targeting of funding, conducting special projects, or other collaborations.”

“All children deserve to grow up without lead burdening their minds and bodies” said Aaron Bernstein, Director of CDC’s National Center for Environmental Health, “We are committed to working together to leave no child behind and put an end to lead poisoning.”

Over 1 million children in the United States suffer from the irreversible impacts of lead poisoning, including reduced intelligence, behavioral and learning disabilities, and effects on many other body systems; new cases continue to be diagnosed every year. Lead-contaminated dust from chipped or peeling lead-based paint is one of the most common causes of elevated blood lead levels in children. Adults with exposure to lead can develop symptoms such as high blood pressure, memory loss and reduced motor skills. Infants and children are especially vulnerable to lead paint exposure because their growing bodies absorb more lead than adults do, and their brains and nervous systems are more sensitive to the damaging effects of lead. They can be exposed from multiple sources and may experience irreversible and life-long health effects.

More than 34 million homes in the US have lead paint somewhere in the building. About 3.3 million homes in the US have children less than six years of age facing one or more lead-based paint hazards, including over 2 million low-income households.

The EPA-HUD Memorandum of Understanding Lead Paint Compliance and Enforcement and the EPA Region 3-HUD-CDC Memorandum of Understanding for sharing of data can both be found on EPA’s Enforcing Lead Laws and Regulations webpage.

You can find out more about identifying and addressing housing health and safety hazards, including those from lead, on HUD’s Healthy Homes Program website.

As part of President Biden’s Investing in America agenda, the US Environmental Protection Agency and the US Department of Energy today released a Funding Opportunity Announcement (FOA) for up to $9.4 million for the development of advanced biofuels. This investment through a new agreement between EPA and DOE is funded by President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act and will support high-impact biofuel technology projects to improve the performance and reduce the cost of biofuel production technologies, scale up production systems in partnership with industry, and accelerate the nation’s bioeconomy. Advancing renewable and sustainable energy sources is essential to achieving the Biden-Harris Administration’s ambitious clean energy and climate goals.

“EPA is proud to partner with DOE in setting up this funding to advance President Biden’s Investing in America agenda,” said Joseph Goffman, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Air and Radiation. “This investment through the Inflation Reduction Act will spur innovation in the production of advanced biofuels, advancing this Administration’s goal to build a stronger clean energy economy.”

“Investing in bioenergy technologies provides a path forward to meet the growing demand for sustainable aviation fuel and other low-carbon biofuels,” said Jeff Marootian, US Department of Energy Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. “This joint DOE and EPA investment in a clean energy future is a great example of interagency partnership to further President Biden’s whole-of-government approach to tackling the climate crisis.”

Biofuels are liquid fuels produced from renewable biological sources, including plants and algae. When responsibly sourced, biofuel production in the US can help strengthen the rural economy, reduce our reliance on foreign sources of oil, and support domestic production of cleaner fuels that can reduce some undesirable environmental impacts of fossil fuel production and use.

The FOA will fund selected projects in two priority areas:

1) Projects aimed at scaling up key process steps in advanced biofuel production.

2) Projects to develop and pilot-test key technology innovations for processing biointermediates, which are feedstocks that have been partially converted at one facility but are then sent to a separate facility for their final processing into a renewable fuel.

Domestic businesses, educational institutions, and nonprofits are eligible to apply for the funding, which will be administered by DOE’s Bioenergy Technologies Office. FOA applicants will be required to explain how their proposed project meets EPA’s Renewable Fuel Standard definition of an advanced biofuel. DOE envisions awarding one or more financial assistance awards in the form of cooperative agreements lasting approximately 36 months. The FOA concept paper deadline is 5 p.m. EDT on March 22, and full applications are due at 5 p.m. EDT on May 24. Learn more about and view the full FOA on DOE’s Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Exchange to register and apply. An informational webinar for potential applicants will be held on Monday, March 4 at 3 p.m. EST.

About the Renewable Fuel Standard Program

The RFS program, which is a national regulatory program implemented by EPA, was created by Congress with the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions along with expanding the nation’s renewable fuels sector while reducing reliance on imported oil. The program requires a certain volume of renewable fuel to replace or reduce the quantity of petroleum-based transportation fuel, heating oil, or jet fuel. The four categories of commonly used renewable fuels are: biomass-based diesel, cellulosic biofuel, advanced biofuel and total renewable fuel.

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced Phase Two winners of the Cleaner Indoor Air During Wildfires Challenge. Challenge winners received prizes of $50,000 for their innovative prototypes that aim to clean indoor air during wildfires.

“These two novel technologies have the potential to provide effective and lower cost options to improve indoor air quality and protect health from wildfire smoke,” said Chris Frey, EPA’s Assistant Administrator for Research and Development. “Having technologies that clean indoor air is becoming even more important to protecting public health as people across the country are experiencing poor air quality, in part due to wildfires.”

The acreage burned by wildfire in the US has increased for the last three decades and is predicted to continue to increase in the future. Wildfires release many pollutants that worsen air quality in surrounding areas. Particle pollution, specifically fine particulate matter (PM2.5 or particles smaller than 2.5 micrometers), is a significant component of wildfire smoke and a known health risk.

Wildfire smoke exposure is particularly harmful for people with pre-existing health conditions, such as asthma, lung disease or cardiovascular disease. Smoke can spread many miles during wildfires causing poor air quality that can lead to significant health effects in surrounding communities. Smoke exposures during wildfires can be reduced by staying indoors with closed doors and windows and cleaning the indoor air, if possible.

Current indoor air cleaning technologies have multiple limitations that prevent widespread use, including the cost of purchase, operation, and maintenance, as well as noise levels and dependence on electrical power, which wildfires or rolling blackouts can disrupt.

To address these limitations, EPA developed this challenge to focus attention on the problem, inspire the development of innovative solutions, and spur the market to commercialize effective solutions. Phase One Challenge winners developed detailed design proposals for affordable approaches to keep indoor air as clean as possible during periods when outdoor PM2.5 concentrations are elevated, such as during wildfire smoke events. Winners and honorable mentions from this first phase of the challenge were invited to submit prototypes of their technologies for evaluation in the second phase of the challenge.

During Phase Two of the challenge, five teams submitted prototype technologies for evaluation. EPA worked closely with partners from federal, state and local agencies as well as academia and industry to assess the prototypes through qualitative and quantitative evaluations. The top two solutions are each receiving $50,000.

Challenge Winners:

The Cocoon: An Accessible Low-Cost Air Cleaner for Safer Spaces During Wildfires – An air cleaner that uses a large, tube-shaped, fabric filter combined with a box fan capable of operating on a battery power to create a low-cost device. Proposed by Elliot Gall, Brett Stinson, Matthew Moore, and Warren Gunn of Portland State University, Mechanical and Materials Engineering, of Portland, Ore.
Metalmark Clean Air Device – A device that uses a novel nanomaterial coating on a filter to enable self-cleaning, prolonging the life of the filter and thereby minimizing the operating costs. Proposed by Sissi Liu, Tanya Shirman, and Elijah Shirman of Metalmark Innovations, Inc., of Boston, Mass.

This week, US District Court Judge James D. Peterson for the Western District of Wisconsin sentenced six Didion Milling Inc. officials – including a corporate vice president and former food safety, environmental and operations managers – for their role in a fatal explosion on May 31, 2017, at a mill operated by Didion.

Didion Vice President of Operations, Derrick Clark, was sentenced to two years in prison, a year of supervised release and a $5,000 fine.  Former Environmental Manager Joseph Winch was sentenced to two years in prison, two years of supervised release and a $10,000 fine for conspiring to falsify Didion’s environmental compliance certifications. Former Food Safety Superintendent Shawn Mesner was sentenced to two years in prison and a year of supervised release after being convicted in October 2023 of conspiring to commit fraud and to falsify Didion’s sanitation log.

Three former Didion shift superintendents – Anthony Hess, Joel Niemeyer and Michael Bright – were sentenced probation and fines for falsification of Didion’s sanitation log.  Nicholas Booker, a fourth shift superintendent, is scheduled to be sentenced in March.

Additionally, the Didion company pled guilty to falsifying its environmental and sanitation logs. Judge Peterson sentenced the company last month to pay $10.25 million in restitution to the victims of the May 2017 explosion and a $1 million fine, as well as to serve five years of probation with special conditions related to oversight of Didion’s operations.

“These defendants put Didion workers in grave danger and five people tragically lost their lives, devastating their families and their community,” said Attorney General Merrick B. Garland. “Companies of all sizes should take note: failure to comply with our country’s workplace safety and environmental laws can cost workers their lives and put individual corporate managers in federal prison.”

At around 10:30 p.m. on the night of the explosion, a fire originated in milling equipment at Didion’s corn mill in Cambria, Wisconsin. The fire led to a series of explosions in the facility, killing five workers and seriously injuring others. The explosions also damaged and caused the collapse of multiple mill buildings. An investigation into Didion’s worker and food safety and environmental practices uncovered criminal violations of law attributable to both the company and senior officials.

Grain milling generates grain dust, which must be effectively managed for workplace safety, environmental, and food safety and quality reasons. Mill operators must adhere to rules and requirements intended to minimize hazards. Grain dust is combustible, and mill operators need to maintain workplace safety through cleaning programs that remove dust accumulations from inside a mill. Mill operators must also capture dust before it is emitted into the environment as particulate matter, a kind of air pollutant.

Investigations of the explosion at Didion’s Cambria mill uncovered long-standing inadequate safety measures and improper handling of grain dust that Didion and its employees concealed through falsified documents and other obstructive conduct.

In October 2023, the Justice Department secured guilty pleas from the company, Didion, and company officials, as well as convictions against two more Didion officials. Today and yesterday, three defendants were sentenced to prison time for their crimes, and another three were sentenced to probation. Sentencing for an additional defendant is scheduled for March. The company was sentenced in January 2024.

“Didion Milling and its senior managers put corporate profits ahead of worker safety and environmental protection, with tragic consequences,” said Assistant Administrator David M. Uhlmann for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “The sentences imposed this week demonstrate that EPA and its law enforcement partners are committed to seeking justice for victims of environmental crime and their families.”

“Workplace and environmental safety are of paramount importance,” said Assistant Attorney General Todd Kim of the Justice Department’s Environment and Natural Resources Division. “We will continue seeking to enforce regulations designed to prevent workplace disasters, and also to punish deceptive conduct that would undermine the administration of these important federal programs.”

“The Didion Milling dust explosion was a tragic incident resulting from a notorious industrial hazard. Individuals considering falsifying records are on notice that making false statements and attempting to obstruct our investigation are serious crimes and will be punished as such,” said Acting Secretary of Labor Julie Su. “The court’s sentences hold the company and these individuals accountable and send a clear message that cover-ups related to workplace safety will not be tolerated.”

Clark was convicted in October 2023 of conspiring to falsify documents relating to dust cleaning practices in the mill and the operation of air pollution prevention equipment and making false compliance certifications as Didion’s “responsible official” under the Clean Air Act. He was also convicted for obstructing the Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s (OSHA) investigation of the explosion at the corn mill by making false and misleading statements during a sworn deposition.

Winch pled guilty to his conspiracy charge before trial, but the court’s sentencing took into consideration Winch’s effort to obstruct the trial of his co-defendants by committing perjury during his trial testimony.

Mesner’s falsification of the log was part of a scheme to mislead Didion’s customers and auditors about the company’s sanitation practices. The log also related to Didion’s compliance with worker safety protections, including the required cleanup of combustible dust, like fine grain dust, to prevent fires and explosions in grain handling facilities. The log purported to be a record of those dust cleanings. Mesner also provided untruthful testimony to OSHA during a sworn statement after the explosion.

Hess, Niemeyer and Bright pled guilty to felonies before trial and accepted responsibility for their actions. Hess was sentenced to a probationary sentence; Niemeyer was sentenced to a year of probation and a $1000 fine; and Bright was sentenced to a year of probation.

Information on how to report suspected environmental violations may be found at the EPA Report a Violation webpage.

Information on how to file a safety and health complaint about unsafe work conditions can be found at OSHA’s File A Complaint webpage. Information about how to file a complaint of retaliation for having engaged in workplace safety-related protected activity can be found at the same website.

This week, the US Environmental Protection Agency released its annual data on 2023 emissions from power plants in the lower 48 states. Nationwide, emissions for 2023 show the most significant emissions reductions since 2020. Emission drops resulted primarily from changes in the mix of fossil fuel-fired generation and improved efficiency.

“This snapshot of progress over the past year shows we are moving in the right direction, but more progress is needed,” said Joseph Goffman, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Air and Radiation. “President Biden is committed to building a clean energy future, and EPA will continue to work with state, Tribal and local leaders, in addition to major players in the power sector, to build on our progress and protect public health.”

Data from 2023 show an 18% decrease in coal generation and an 8% increase in natural gas generation from 2022. From 2022-2023, emission rates at coal facilities for sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides improved by 7% and 3%, respectively. Roughly half of this improvement resulted from units more effectively operating their existing controls and half resulted from increased utilization of more highly controlled units.

Compared to 2022, the 2023 data show a 15% decrease in NOX emissions, a 24% decrease in SO2 emissions, a 7% decrease in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, and a 17% decrease in mercury emissions. Additionally, ozone season (May 1 to September 30) NOX emissions decreased by 9% nationwide and 18% for the 10 states implementing the Good Neighbor Plan.

Between 1990 and 2023, annual emissions of SO2 from power plants fell by 96% and annual emissions of NOX from power plants fell by 90%. In 2023, sources in both the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule annual program and the Acid Rain Program together emitted 0.65 million tons of SO2, a reduction of 11.2 million tons from 1995 levels. Additionally in 2023, sources in these programs together emitted 0.64 million tons of NOx, a 5.2-million-ton reduction from 1995 levels. While complying with programs to reduce SO2, NOx, and mercury, power plants reduced their CO2 emissions by 28% between 1995 and 2023.

These long-term declines in power sector emissions reduce air pollution and protect public health. NOX and SO2 emissions contribute to the formation of ground-level ozone and particulate matter, which can lead to respiratory and cardiovascular problems. Exposure to mercury, a potent neurotoxin, can adversely affect growing brains and nervous systems in infants and children, as well as affect the central nervous system and cardiovascular function of adults.

EPA collects detailed SO2, NOX, CO2, and mercury emission data and other information from power plants across the country as part of the Acid Rain Program, the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule Programs, and the Mercury and Air Toxics Standards. Emissions data collected through these programs are posted online and accessible to the public in summary form on the Emissions Comparisons page. More information about power plants is available on EPA’s Power Sector Programs website.

Apache Corporation (Apache) has agreed to pay $4 million in civil penalties and undertake projects expected to cost at least $5.5 million to ensure 422 of its oil and gas well pads in New Mexico and Texas comply with federal and state clean air regulations and offset past illegal emissions.

Apache’s agreement settles a civil suit, filed jointly by the United States, on behalf of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the New Mexico Environment Department (NMED), alleging that Apache failed to comply with federal and state requirements to capture and control air emissions from 23 of its oil and gas production operations in New Mexico and Texas. EPA and NMED identified the alleged violations through field investigations and repeated flyover surveillance conducted in 2019, 2020 and 2022.

Compliance with this robust settlement will result in annual reductions of more than 9,650 tons of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) and 900 tons of methane, which equates to more than 25,000 tons of carbon dioxide (CO2). VOCs are a key component in the formation of ground-level ozone or smog, which irritates lungs, exacerbates diseases including asthma and can increase susceptibility to respiratory illnesses, such as pneumonia and bronchitis.

“Robust enforcement of Clean Air Act violations at oil and gas facilities protects communities from harmful smog and reduces methane emissions that are major contributors to global climate change,” said David M. Uhlmann, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “Today’s agreement demonstrates EPA’s commitment to working with our state partners to tackle climate change and improve air quality for everyone living in the United States.”

“Today’s settlement will ensure compliance at hundreds of oil and gas facilities across New Mexico and Texas,” said Assistant Attorney General Todd Kim of the Justice Department’s Environment and Natural Resources Division. “Under the settlement, over 400 Apache facilities will be required to take extensive steps to reduce emissions of volatile organic compounds – which contribute to smog – as well as methane gas, which is a significant contributor to climate change.”

“Noxious pollutants directly threaten the health of neighboring communities while propelling our world toward climate disaster,” said US Attorney Alexander M.M. Uballez for the District of New Mexico. “I applaud the tireless efforts of the Department of Justice’s Environment and Natural Resources Division, the US EPA and the NMED to protect our lungs and our earth. Environmental justice is a top priority for the Department of Justice and the US Attorney’s Office for the District of New Mexico.”

“This settlement shows that oil and gas operators deserve greater scrutiny because too many are failing to comply with federal and state rules,” said New Mexico Environment Cabinet Secretary James Kenney. “As a result, bad actors will cause greater federal and state regulation of the entire oil and gas industry as ozone levels rise and public health suffers.”

The $4 million fine outlined in the settlement will be shared equally by the United States and the State of New Mexico, with New Mexico’s portion going to the state’s general fund. The settlement document (consent decree) was filed together with the complaint in the US District Court for the District of New Mexico and requires the company to take numerous steps to ensure that 422 well pads covered by the consent decree and located in New Mexico and Texas are operated lawfully.

In addition to the $4 million fine, Apache will also spend at least $4.5 million to implement extensive design, operation, maintenance and monitoring improvements, including installing new tank pressure monitoring systems that will provide advance notification of potential emissions and allow for immediate response action by the company. Apache will also spend over $1 million to offset the harm caused by the alleged violations by replacing, on an accelerated schedule, more than 400 pollutant-emitting pneumatic devices with non-emitting devices.

Pound for pound, methane is approximately 28 times more powerful than carbon dioxide in terms of its impact on global warming. Accordingly, a reduction of 900 tons of annual methane reductions equates to more than 25,000 tons of CO2, akin to eliminating the use of more than 2.5 million gallons of gasoline annually. Greenhouse gases from human activities are a primary cause of climate change and global warming. This enforcement settlement furthers EPA’s commitment to deliver public health protections against climate-impacting pollution and other pollutants for communities across America and helps deliver on EPA’s top commitment in its strategic plan, which is to tackle the climate crisis.

The Clean Air Act requires the EPA to set National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for criteria pollutants that are considered harmful to public health and the environment. Ozone is a criteria pollutant that is created when oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and VOCs react in the atmosphere. VOCs and NOx are emitted by oil and gas production facilities, such as those operated by Apache. During the timeframes of Apache’s alleged violations, air quality monitors in the relevant counties in New Mexico registered rising ozone concentrations exceeding 95% of the NAAQS for ozone. In counties where ozone levels reach 95% of the NAAQS, NMED is required by New Mexico state statute to take action to reduce ozone pollution.

Apache Corporation is a wholly owned subsidiary of APA Corporation which is engaged in the exploration and development of oil and natural gas resources in the United States. Apache is a large producer in the Permian Basin, which is a shale oil and gas producing area located in southeast New Mexico and West Texas.

This settlement is part of EPA’s National Enforcement and Compliance Initiative, Mitigating Climate Change.

For more information about today’s settlement please visit the Apache Corporation Settlement webpage.

The Justice Department’s Environmental Enforcement Division lodged today’s proposed consent decree in the US District Court for the District of New Mexico. The settlement is subject to a 30-day public comment period and final court approval. The consent decree will be available for viewing on the Justice Department’s website. The Federal Register notice will also include instructions for submitting public comment.

The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the US Department of Energy (DOE) announced a Notice of Intent (NOI) today to make funds available to help measure and reduce methane emissions from the oil and gas sectors as part of President Biden’s Investing in America agenda. Methane is a climate “super pollutant” that is more potent than carbon dioxide and responsible for approximately one third of the warming from greenhouse gases occurring today.

This funding from the Inflation Reduction Act will help oil and natural gas sector operators cut methane emissions and transition to innovative methane emissions reduction technologies, while also supporting partnerships to improve emissions measurement and provide accurate, transparent data to impacted communities. Through a combination of technical and financial assistance, the Methane Emissions Reduction Program will help reduce inefficiencies in US oil and gas operations, create new jobs in energy and disadvantaged communities, improve public health, and realize near-term emission reductions—helping reach the nation’s ambitious climate and clean air goals.

“We know the adoption of cleaner and smarter ways to monitor and reduce wasteful methane emissions is critical to addressing climate change,” said Jennifer Macedonia, EPA Deputy Assistant Administrator in the Office of Air and Radiation. “Through these historic investments from President Biden’s Investing in America agenda, EPA and DOE will invest in American innovation and contribute to the Biden-Harris Administration’s ambitious goal of reducing climate pollution while improving public health and protecting communities.”

“As part of a whole of government approach, DOE and EPA are coordinating our efforts to address methane emissions throughout the oil and natural gas supply chain,” said Ryan Peay, Deputy Assistant Secretary for the Office of Resource Sustainability in DOE's Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management. “Together we are supporting innovative solutions that will address these harmful emissions at a large scale across the nation, while also developing region-specific assistance that will result in environmental, health, and safety benefits for local communities.”

If released, the corresponding funding opportunity would focus on three areas:

Mitigating methane emissions and reducing other air pollution associated with existing wells and infrastructure. Funds would be provided to mitigate and monitor methane emissions from low-producing wells and other oil and natural gas assets, that are owned and/or operated by small producers/operators, through a small number of awards, which would each fund a selected lead entity such as an organization that represents oil and natural gas producers, a non-governmental research institution, university, or Tribal organization. The intent would be for these organizations to manage and optimize the effective distribution of these funds to owners/operators with relevant oil and natural gas assets, including one award focused on mitigating methane emissions from oil and natural gas assets on Tribal lands. This area is anticipated to complement efforts currently being undertaken by states through recently announced formula grants.
Accelerating the deployment of innovative methane reduction solutions for reducing emissions from petroleum and natural gas systems. This may include efforts to support the field demonstration of near-commercial solutions that can effectively address emissions from difficult-to-mitigate sources on a large scale, to accelerate the implementation of innovative methane emissions reduction technology solutions.
Characterizing and quantifying methane emissions from oil and natural gas operations across multiple, large geographical regions through the creation of regional methane emissions measurement and monitoring consortia. Activities may include, but are not limited to, methane emissions data collection and acquisition; development of annual emissions estimates at equipment-, facility-, and basin-levels; and training on data and technology usage for workers in the oil and gas industry and communities with environmental justice concerns. The intent would be to develop region-specific collaborative partnerships among oil and natural gas owners and operators, universities, environmental justice organizations, community leaders, workers, technology developers, Tribes, state regulatory agencies, non-governmental research organizations, Federally Funded Research and Development Centers, and DOE’s National Laboratories.
In keeping with the Biden-Harris Administration’s goal to ensure the clean energy transition benefits all, this program also advances the Justice40 Initiative – which set the goal that 40% of the overall benefits of certain federal climate and clean energy investments flow to disadvantaged communities, facilitates broader energy prosperity, and supports the equitable creation and retention of good-paying jobs. Guidance on specific application and reporting requirements will be included in the program funding opportunity announcement (FOA).

This NOI is issued to give applicants ample time to prepare their proposals and form partnerships (if necessary) in anticipation of the upcoming issuance of the FOA. More information, including anticipated eligibility criteria for this NOI, can be found at the FedConnect MERP NOI website.

Visit EPA and DOE websites for more information about the Methane Emissions Reduction Program.

On Thursday, Feb. 8, EPA finalized a stronger air quality standard that will better protect America’s families, workers, and communities from the dangerous and costly health effects of fine particle pollution, also known as soot. The stronger annual health-based air quality standard for fine particulate matter (PM2.5) will help avoid up to 4,500 premature deaths and 290,000 lost workdays, and yield up to $46 billion in net health benefits in 2032. For every $1 spent from this action, there could be as much as $77 in human health benefits in 2032.

Leaders from across public health and environmental advocacy communities, along with federal and state government leaders, are praising the final standards. See what they are saying:

Public Health, Environmental Justice, and Faith Organizations

Dr. Doris Browne, President, National Medical Association: “Administrator Regan and President Biden deserve thanks for taking this vital step to curb soot pollution - a dangerous and even deadly pollutant that has taken an oversized toll on underrepresented and overburdened communities less equipped to deal with its severe health impacts, This new standard of 9 micrograms per cubic meter will save lives based on scientific evidence. That is the bottom line. And as a physician, an advocate for clean air, and the past president of the National Medical Association representing physicians, our ultimate goal is health equity.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Paul Billings, Senior Vice President for Public Policy, American Lung Association: “The new, stronger particle pollution standards will save lives. Despite what polluting industries are saying about the new air pollution standards, the sky will not fall and the world will not come to end. Don’t believe the cherry-picked data, misleading maps and false claims of economic calamity: they’re just not true.

“EPA estimates that in 2032, the nation will see 4,500 fewer premature deaths, 290,000 fewer lost workdays, 800,000 fewer cases of asthma symptoms and 2,000 fewer emergency department visits from the new standards. That’s not a calamity, the new standards are a lifesaver.

“The American Lung Association looks forward to working with states and EPA to implement these new standards to maximize air pollution reductions and public health protections while still allowing for economic growth – as always happens with implementing the Clean Air Act.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

The Medical Society Consortium on Climate and Health: “The Consortium welcomes these strengthened standards and thanks President Biden and Administrator Regan for their efforts to reduce air pollution and safeguard our health. Soot is a dangerous and deadly pollutant produced by industrial manufacturing, car exhaust, and power plant emissions mostly from the burning of fossil fuels. It threatens our health and environment — affecting approximately 63 million Americans and posing particular risks to infants, children, pregnant individuals, seniors, communities of color, and people with chronic illness. As doctors, nurses, and allied health professionals, we see the effects of harmful air pollution in our clinics and hospitals. From children who live close to polluting industries and develop asthma to elderly individuals who are at greater risk for stroke and heart disease from air pollution–we advocate for cleaner air to best protect the health of our patients.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

American Public Health Association: “APHA is pleased that the US Environmental Protection Agency announced a critical final rule today that will update the annual national ambient air quality standard for particulate matter pollution from the current level of 12 micrograms per cubic meter to nine µg/m3. The updated annual standard would have significant public health benefits estimated at $46 billion by 2032. Once fully implemented, the updated standard would avoid an estimated 290,000 lost workdays, 800,000 asthma attacks, 2,000 emergency room visits and 4,500 premature deaths.

Particulate matter (PM) pollution has been known to cause breathing trouble, asthma attacks, COPD exacerbations, heart attacks, strokes, lung cancer and premature death. It can harm even the healthiest, but millions of individuals across the US are at greater risk if they have respiratory disease or are one of the nearly 25 million Americans with asthma. Additionally, PM exposure disproportionately impacts the health of low-income and minority communities, who often live near polluting sources.

This critical move to strengthen this public health standard will better protect the health of the nation and help reduce the disproportionate impact PM pollution is having on the health of our most vulnerable communities.

The proposed lower annual standard for particulate matter will protect the health of millions of individuals in communities across the country. While EPA is to be commended for strengthening the annual standard, we believe it is a missed opportunity that the agency chose not to update the 24-hour standard to 25 µg/m3 as recommended by APHA and other health organizations, and we urge the agency to revisit this decision during its next review.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Nsedu Obot Witherspoon, MPH, Executive Director, Children’s Environmental Health Network: “Air pollutants contribute to the negative health and well-being of pregnant women and children. Children are known to be more vulnerable to the adverse health effects of air pollution due to their higher minute ventilation, immature immune system, involvement in vigorous activities, the longer periods of time they spend outdoors and the continuing development of their lungs during early childhood. These urgent times require decisive action, such as stronger soot pollution standards.”

Alison Lee, MD, chair of the ATS Environmental Health Policy Committee, American Thoracic Society: “A more protective annual standard will save lives, reduce asthma and COPD exacerbations and improve the quality of air for everyone. While I am disappointed that EPA did not go further to address the daily PM standard, today's action by EPA is important progress and will bring cleaner air to communities across the US" [Statement, Feb. 7]

Manish Bapna, President and CEO, Natural Resources Defense Council:1

“This will help save lives today and improve the health of generations to come. Soot puts tens of millions of Americans at risk, disproportionately harming low-income communities and people of color. It’s especially dangerous to children, the elderly and people coping with compromised health.

“The EPA is putting public health first by requiring polluters to cut soot from the air we all breathe.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Ben Jealous, Executive Director, Sierra Club: “We’re glad to see the Biden Administration answered the call to reduce harmful soot pollution. The decision to strengthen the annual particulate matter standards is more than just policy; it's about securing clean and safe air for our families and communities. It's about keeping kids in school, and protecting ourselves and our neighbors from the very real risks of asthma, heart attacks, and premature death.

“It’s shameful that, in the face of such clear and compelling evidence of the public health and economic benefits of stronger soot standards, big polluters and their allies in Washington do everything in their power to undermine these commonsense air pollution standards. Their resistance is a stark reminder that the fight for clean air and a healthier future is far from over, and we will continue working to ensure the benefits of these stronger air pollution standards reach the communities that need them most.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Patrice Simms, Vice President of Health Communities, Earth Justice: “Particulate matter pollution is deadly, especially for children and older Americans. The Biden Administration’s new air quality standards will save thousands of lives and help address unjust disparities in air quality for communities of color and low-income communities. We applaud EPA for issuing a rule that will help reduce heart disease, asthma, and other serious illnesses. We look forward to EPA’s implementation efforts, which must include robust enforcement and rigorous monitoring.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Amanda Leland, Executive Director, Environmental Defense Fund: “Particle pollution – or soot – harms lung development in children, is linked to diseases from bronchitis to cancer, and is responsible for more than 100,000 premature deaths every year. EPA’s action today to strengthen our national health-based standard for soot is a big step toward cleaner air and healthier lives for all Americans.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Margie Alt, Director, Climate Action Campaign: “I want to thank President Biden and EPA Administrator Regan for making good on their promise to finalize strong soot pollution standards that will save lives and slash air pollution for people across the country, especially those disproportionately impacted by deadly particle pollution.

“This standard will make meaningful progress toward meeting public health goals and addressing the administration’s environmental justice commitments. The EPA and President Biden set pollution limits that will literally save thousands of lives, especially in communities of color –  4,500 lives saved, 5,700 cases of new asthma avoided, and 290,000 fewer lost workdays. That’s $46 billion in net benefits for all of us.

“Of course there is more that must be done to fully protect public health and address pollution from the power sector and we look forward to seeing additional standards being finalized in the coming months. But for today we celebrate progress and thank President Biden and Administrator Regan and their teams for a good job well done.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Maite Arce, President and CEO, Hispanic Access Foundation: “We applaud the administration for taking action and strengthening its standards to reduce soot pollution and improve air quality. Soot is a dangerous and deadly pollutant produced by power plants, vehicle tailpipes, and other industrial sources, and it threatens our health and environment, posing particular risks for children, seniors, communities of color, and people with chronic illnesses, causing devastating health impacts including premature death, heart disease, aggravated asthma, decreased lung function, and difficulty breathing.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Dominique Browning, Director and Co-Founder, Moms Clean Air Force: “Particle pollution is a killer. In the United States alone, it cuts short the lives of well over 100,000 people per year—a staggering toll. Children’s bodies are uniquely vulnerable to the harms of soot pollution. We commend EPA for taking a significant step forward in strengthening the annual standard for particle pollution, also known as soot, to 9 micrograms per cubic meter from its current level at 12. EPA’s strengthened national health standard for particle pollution is the first improvement in over a decade; the previous administration chose to keep an inadequate level of protection. Soot is associated with increased infant mortality, hospital admissions for heart and lung diseases, cancer, and increased asthma severity. EPA’s finalized protection is an important step towards cleaner, healthier air for all children.

“EPA’s new protections also go a long way in strengthening the network of air monitors on which it relies. Its emphasis on greater guidance in the placement of those monitors in already highly burdened communities is a welcome move. Right now, people of color are consistently exposed to higher levels of particle pollution from sources like power plants, industrial facilities, and heavily-trafficked roads, and they are more than six times more likely to visit the emergency room for asthma-related issues. Black children are more than seven times more likely to die from asthma than white children.

“We urge EPA to prioritize protections against elevated daily exposures to particle pollution by ensuring that the implementation of these stronger national standards reduces daily pollution spikes. EPA must swiftly evaluate further strengthening the health standard for daily exposures. This is vital. We also call on EPA to ensure that the monitoring improvements are designed to reveal the sources responsible for high soot levels, and to accelerate the adoption of enforceable pollution limits.

“Taken together, all of the EPA protections under Administrator Regan’s tenure are offering much-needed and significant progress. EPA’s recent methane rule will protect people from the harmful volatile organic compounds and toxics released along with methane–and dramatically slash climate-heating methane emissions. Stronger pollution protections for vehicles and power plants are anticipated in the coming months. So much is at stake for our children, our communities, and our collective future. Members of Moms Clean Air Force will continue to demand that every one of these critical EPA protections gets across the finish line. We have absolutely no time to lose.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Lori Lodes, Executive Director, Climate Power: “President Biden is holding corporate polluters accountable for harming our health and fueling the climate crisis. His action will be especially impactful in communities of color and low-income areas that have paid the health and economic price of corporate greed for far too long. When Donald Trump was president, he filled the EPA with oil and coal lobbyists and weakened clean air standards. President Biden has spent three years cleaning up Trump’s mess, and America can’t afford another Trump term.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Matthew Davis, Vice President of Federal Policy, League of Conservation Voters: “We applaud the Biden-Harris administration’s new, tougher annual standard to cut deadly soot pollution and build a more clean and equitable energy future. For the second time in just two weeks, President Biden and his administration is delivering big for environmental justice, public health, climate, and science. Communities of color and low wealth communities too often experience disproportionate health impacts and environmental injustices due to exposure to soot pollution from Big Polluters and heavy traffic. While we still need to strengthen the daily standard for soot, cutting the annual standard by a quarter is a significant step forward. The administration must swiftly work with states and local air districts to implement these much improved standards.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Anastasia Gordon, Federal Policy Director, WE ACT for Environmental Justice: “While we commend the new soot pollution standard, we won’t stop fighting until we stamp out all forms of air pollution that make our communities sick and cut our lives short. Clean air is our right, and clean air is our fight.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

LaTricea D. Adams, Founder and CEO, Black Millennials for Flint:

“It’s a sigh of relief that EPA and the Biden-Harris Administration listened to our call to action to create the strongest standards on soot pollution in history. These new rules will work to better protect the wombs of Black, Latinx and Indigenous women, our first environments, leading to healthier births with automatic freedom and access to breathe clean air.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

John Graham, Senior Scientist, Clean Air Taskforce:

“Strengthening the PM2.5 annual standard from 12 µg/m3 to 9 µg/m3 will improve public health protection across the country and will make some progress in addressing disparities in health impacts among various populations. This standard is similar to the Canadian standard of 8.8 µg/m 3. However, we continue to believe that the available scientific knowledge — as indicated by the recommendation of a majority of EPA’s Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee — supports a primary PM2.5 annual standard of 8 µg/m3 and a daily standard of 25 µg/m3 to protect public health from both typical and peak concentrations of PM2.5 and provide an adequate margin of safety.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Lisa Frank, Executive Director, Environment America:

“Air pollution used to be the price we had to pay to heat our homes, commute or produce goods by burning coal, oil and gas. Thankfully, in the rapidly accelerating renewable energy era, that’s no longer the case. These soot standards will save lives, clear our skies and alleviate the burden of asthma and other illnesses. That’s something all Americans should celebrate.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Yadira Sánchez, Executive Director of Poder Latinx:

“Soot has been detrimental to the respiratory health of Latinx families, and it is a silent assailant that is not talked about enough. No one should get sick from the place they call home, but unfortunately, this has become a reality for many members of our community. We celebrate the EPA’s drive for tighter rules towards improving air quality standards so all minority and underrepresented families can rest easily, knowing their health is not at risk when they leave their homes. We need, however, to strengthen policies around better air and environmental protections so no one in America has to pay the hefty price of risking their health at the expense of high polluters who disregard human life and our natural resources.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Rev. Dr. Jessica Moerman, President & CEO, Evangelical Environmental Network:

“Every child deserves to reach their full God-given potential. However, before they even draw their own first breath, soot pollution can rob children of a bright future, saddling them with asthma, reduced IQ, and complications from pre-term birth. Therefore, it is no understatement to call today’s announcement truly life-changing. The strengthened soot standard will ensure more Americans can experience a more “abundant life” (John 10:10), saving thousands of lives, improving the quality of life for hundreds of thousands more, and saving billions in avoided health costs.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Trevor Higgins, Senior Vice President, Center for American Progress:

“The EPA has just taken a huge step forward in keeping more soot out of the air. This will improve public health and save lives, especially in front-line communities most harmed by pollution from fossil fuels. The Biden administration’s clean energy and transportation investments have made it possible for states and counties to deliver on these new standards, which are now stronger than ever.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Rev. Susan Hendershot, President, Interfaith Power & Light:

“EPA’s updated soot protections are a step forward in helping protect our communities from deadly air pollution. With this rule, we have a moral opportunity to advance environmental justice, ensure that our neighbors have clean air to breathe, and care for those most vulnerable to these pollutants. No one should be forced to live in a community where it is hazardous to simply breathe the air.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Adrienne Hollis, Vice President of Environmental Justice, Public Health, And Community Revitalization, The National Wildlife Federation:

“Particulate pollution is one of the most serious and preventable threats to people and wildlife alike. This rule is a much-needed step by the Biden Administration in order to address the public health and environmental threats posing some of the most serious challenges for frontline and fenceline communities. The president and the Environmental Protection Agency need to build upon this important progress by further strengthening these and other safeguards in order to protect our air, public health, and environment.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Irene Burga, Director of the Climate Justice and Clean Air Program, GreenLatinos:

“Today, we celebrate a significant victory in our ongoing efforts to improve air quality and protect public health, especially within the Latine community. The implementation of these final EPA standards on soot promises tangible improvements in the well-being of our communities, particularly among those most vulnerable. However, we acknowledge that there is still more work ahead. Nationwide, Latine children disproportionately bear the burden of asthma, a condition exacerbated by exposure to PM2.5. Despite our collective strides, we must remain steadfast in our commitment to environmental justice. While we did not achieve the more ambitious standard of 8 μg/m3 that environmental justice organizations advocated for, this standard represents a crucial step forward. We look forward to continued collaboration with the EPA and the Biden Administration to ensure robust enforcement of the annual standard, as we remain dedicated to advancing proposals for the 24-hour standard.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Charles Harper, Senior Power Sector Policy Lead, Evergreen Action: “The Biden administration’s announcement today takes a critical step toward cutting air pollution that puts hundreds of thousands of Americans at risk and protecting frontline communities who are exposed to disproportionate levels of deadly soot pollution. By strengthening the national soot standard, EPA is tightening its grip on dangerous air pollution and will prevent 4,500 deaths per year—and hundreds of thousands of other medically related events.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Zachary Barber, Advocate, PennEnvironment Research & Policy Center: “Clean air is a right, not a privilege—and today’s announcement by Biden’s EPA makes a critical step toward delivering cleaner air for millions of Americans. Taking soot pollution out of our air will save lives and help kids with asthma breathe more easily, especially in places like Pennsylvania that regularly suffer from elevated soot levels.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Andre Delattre, Senior Vice President and Chief Operating Officer for Programs, US PIRG Education Fund: “For too many Americans, the very air we breathe can make us sick. This is a problem we can choose to solve. This announcement is a welcome step toward a healthier future. We thank President Biden and the EPA for heeding the science and public calls for cleaner air and finalizing strong limits on soot.” [Statement, Feb. 7]

Jennifer Hadayia, Executive Director, President and CEO, Air Alliance Houston: “We here at Air Alliance Houston applaud and celebrate this change. Houstonians have been forced to breathe harmful soot pollution for too long from too many sources, such as the sprawling oil and petrochemical complexes, rock crushers like the one proposed across from LBJ  standard will finally force a hard look at local measures to Hospital and from freeway expansions like the proposed new Hardy Highway. This new protect our health. I have no doubt that this change will improve health and save lives.” [Statement, Feb. 7] 

Senate

Sen. Tom Carper (D-DE) @SenatorCarper

Here's the simple truth — air pollution is bad for our health, bad for our economy, and bad for our planet. I applaud @EPA for following sound science to protect Americans from harmful soot pollution.

EPW Majority @EPWCmte

This is a BIG deal. EPA’s strengthened rule will protect more Americans from soot pollution — one of the most harmful air pollutants to human health.

Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse (D-RI) @SenWhitehouse

The health harms of soot pollution are real, and fall most heavily on children, the elderly, people of color, poor communities, and folks with pre-existing conditions. Glad to see @EPA strengthen this standard today.

 Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand (D-NY) @gillibrandny

Thank you @POTUS and @EPA for taking steps to clean up our air and protect public health. I pushed @EPA for this strengthened soot standard and am glad to see it finalized — it could prevent 4,500 premature deaths, especially in communities of color.

 Sen. Ed Markey (D-MA) @SenMarkey

For far too long, communities of color in the US have experienced disproportionate levels of soot pollution—harming their health. Today's new, strong standard on soot from @EPA is a step toward addressing this environmental injustice and keeping people safe.

 Sen. Chris Van Hollen (D-MD) @ChrisVanHollen

This move by @POTUS will help clean up our air and protect the most vulnerable in our communities. The Biden Administration has worked relentlessly to tackle dangerous pollution in our air, water, and more, and generations of Americans will feel the benefits.

House

Rep. Frank Pallone @FrankPallone

Even short-term exposure to fine particulate matter pollution can cause asthma attacks, acute bronchitis, and more. This pollution is dangerous, and Americans have a right to clean, safe air. I applaud @EPA for protecting that right with a stronger, health-based standard.

Rep. Pramila Jayapal @RepJayapal

Thank you, @POTUS and @EPAMichaelRegan — this is a major step that will reduce air pollution and save thousands of lives!

Energy & Commerce Democrats @EnergyCommerce

NEW: Ranking Member @FrankPallone applauds @EPA's action to strengthen air quality standards. Americans have a right to clean, safe air and this fine particulate pollution poses serious health risks to communities every day.

Progressive Caucus @USProgressives

More exciting progress from the @EPA! They've strengthened the Clean Air Act to protect us against soot, one of the most dangerous forms of air pollution. This rule will be life-saving for the elderly, poor communities, people of color, and those with pre-existing conditions.

Rep. Nanette D. Barragán @RepBarragan

Great News!! @EPA is strengthening air quality standards for fine #ParticlePoluution, one of the most widespread and health-threatening air pollutants affecting the health of communities across the country.

 Rep. Jerry Nadler @RepJerryNadler

I’m grateful that President Biden’s @EPA is following science by strengthening air quality standards for fine #ParticlePollution, one of the most widespread and health-threatening air pollutants affecting the health of communities worldwide.

 Rep. Sean Casten @RepCasten

The benefits of stronger soot pollution standards can’t be denied. For every $1 in costs there could be $77 in health benefits, and in 2032 we’ll see up to:

4,500 premature deaths prevented
2,000 avoided E.R. visits
800,000 avoided asthma symptoms
Rep. Kathy Castor @USRepKCastor

Breathe in the good news, we have more #SolutionsForPollution! With the Inflation Reduction Act, Bipartisan Infrastructure Law & the @EPA's updated air quality standards, we are improving public health for our neighbors and eliminating dirty, planet-warming pollution.

Rep. Shri Thanedar @RepShriThanedar

For far too long, communities of color in the US have experienced disproportionate levels of soot pollution. Today’s new standard on soot from @POTUS and the @EPA is a step in the right direction to address this environmental injustice. #ActOnSoot

 Rep. Raja Krishnamoorthi @CongressmanRaja

This new rule from the @EPA could prevent 4,500 premature deaths over the next decade.

 Rep. Diana DeGette @RepDianaDeGette

The @EPA & @POTUS' work to tighten limits on fine industrial particles is a major step forward in combating deadly air pollution & a huge win for public health. This effort will not only save lives & lower health costs but pave the way for a healthier future for all Americans.

Rep. David Trone @RepDavidTrone

Soot pollution is one of the most dangerous forms of air pollution and is linked to serious and even deadly illnesses. I applaud @EPA for updating the air quality standard for these pollutants. In Congress, I will always fight for a climate our kids can grow up and grow old in.

Rep. Glenn Ivey @RepGlennlvey

The Biden admin's new soot standard is a big step forward for environmental justice, healthy communities, & science. I applaud the @EPAfor enacting a stronger standard to clean up our air and prevent hazardous soot exposure for communities already overburdened by Big Polluters.

 Rep. Lisa Blunt Rochester @RepLBR

NEWS: @EPA is strengthening air quality standards for fine #ParticlePollution, one of the most widespread & health-threatening air pollutants.

 I'm proud to have led the fight w/ @RepBarragan & @SenMarkey in calling for this action so our communities have cleaner air to breathe.

Rep. John Sarbanes @RepSarbanes

#Soot pollution is one of the most harmful forms of air pollution and is linked to severe illnesses. Pleased to see @EPA finalize a stronger #AirQuality standard that will result in cleaner air for everyone, especially those in communities historically overburdened by pollution.

Rep. Betty McCollum @BettyMcCollum04

Huge environmental news today: @EPA’s announcement on strengthened soot standards will translate into a life-saving reduction in pollution, preventing 4,500 premature deaths and 800,000 asthma symptom cases annually.

 Rep. Jennifer McClellan @RepMcClellan

The @EPA’s new soot pollution standard is estimated to prevent 4,200 lives and 270,000 lost workdays a year, and deliver $46 billion in health benefits in 2032! Watch my floor remarks commending the EPA for its actions here.

 Rep. Chuy García @RepChuyGarcia

Little Village in my district ranks in the 98th percentile in the US for air pollution that causes cancer and respiratory disease. Trucks that emit massive amounts of exhaust crisscross my district. Stronger @EPA soot standards will save lives in the communities I represent.

Rep. Lucy McBath @RepLucyMcBath

In Georgia, we know all too well the damage and health problems that soot pollution can cause. I'm pleased to see the @EPA and @POTUS announce increased standards we called for to protect families in our state and around the country.

 Rep. Hank Johnson @RepHankJohnson

I applaud the @EPAMichaelRegan & @POTUS for enacting a tough soot standard that will provide cleaner, safer air for all. #SolutionsForPollution like this one protect the health of our communities, reduce ER visits due to soot, and help everyone breathe easier.

Rep. Darren Soto @RepDarrenSoto

The @EPA has finalized new limits on soot pollution, which threatens American lives every year. The Biden Administration continues on implementing life-saving measures to protect families and ensure cleaner air quality.

Rep. Delia Ramirez @repdeliaramirez

For far too long, low-income families and communities of color have been short-changed as it relates to climate protection efforts. That must change!  Today's new clean air standard addressing soot from the @EPA is a step in the right direction to right current and historical environmental injustices.

Rep. Brad Schneider @RepSchneider

Last year, I called on the EPA to combat soot pollution. Today, I commend @EPA for strengthening key #AirQuality standards for fine particle pollution. This means cleaner air for families in communities like Waukegan that have historically shouldered the burden of air pollution.

Rep. Dina Titus @repdinatitus

Last year I urged @EPA to follow sound science to strengthen the standards for annual and short-term particle pollution. Strong air quality improves long-term health for all Nevadans and fosters stronger economies, better landscapes, and greater learning.

Rep. Mike Quigley @RepMikeQuigley

All Americans deserve to breathe CLEAN air

As Co-Chair of @SEEC, I'm proud to see the EPA finalizing new standards that will protect our most vulnerable communities from harmful pollution.

Natural Resources Democrats @NRDems

@EPA's latest soot standards will:

prevent up to 4,500 premature deaths every year,
avert 800,000 cases of asthma symptoms annually &
slash over 290,000 lost workdays.
@POTUS is working to provide cleaner, safer air for all.

State/Local

Governor Jay Inslee @GovInslee

Great leadership by the @EPA to better protect our health from harmful air pollution. The newly adopted federal standard for fine particle pollution will work in tandem with Washington's actions under the Climate Commitment Act to better protect our most vulnerable communities.

California Attorney General Rob Bonta

“Today’s announcement is a major victory for environmental justice,” said Attorney General Bonta. “Across California and beyond, too many people suffer from the high levels of particulate matter pollution in their neighborhoods. The Biden Administration, simply by recognizing that fact, has taken a key step that will support states in their efforts to clean up their air and protect the public, especially overburdened communities.”

Bay Area Air Quality District @AirDistrict

The Air District supports the more stringent health standard for particulate matter pollution adopted today by the @EPA. The annual air quality standard for particulate matter has been tightened from 12 micrograms per cubic meter of air to a more health protective level of 9.

Basil Seggos, Commissioner of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation @BasilSeggos

I applaud @EPA@EPAMichaelRegan for finalizing strong, national standards to reduce soot. This will build upon the progress made in improving air quality throughout New York State & the US, especially for our most at-risk populations. @NYSDEC

 Kate Johnson, Head of US Federal Affairs, C40 Cities: “Today’s EPA rule will cut pollution and protect the health of millions of Americans, including city residents that have been disproportionately impacted by pollution. For years, cities have led the way in reducing air pollution by electrifying cars and buses, promoting walking and transit, and tackling industrial sources of emissions in urban areas. But cities alone cannot address all the sources of dangerous soot pollution. The EPA’s new soot pollution standards will improve life for urban residents, from preventing sickness and death to increasing economic productivity. C40 Cities thanks President Biden and EPA Administrator Regan for ensuring all Americans can breathe cleaner air.”

The Biden-Harris Administration on Wednesday finalized a significantly stronger air quality standard that will better protect America’s families, workers, and communities from the dangerous and costly health effects of fine particle pollution, also known as soot. By strengthening the annual health-based national ambient air quality standard for fine particulate matter (PM2.5) from a level of 12 micrograms per cubic meter to 9 micrograms per cubic meter, the US Environmental Protection Agency’s updated standard will save lives — preventing up to 4,500 premature deaths and 290,000 lost workdays, yielding up to $46 billion in net health benefits in 2032. For every $1 spent from this action, there could be as much as $77 in human health benefits in 2032.

Today’s action is based on the best available science, as required by the Clean Air Act, and sets an air quality level that EPA will help states and Tribal Nations achieve over the coming years — including through complementary EPA standards to reduce pollution from power plants, vehicles, and industrial facilities, paired with historic investments under President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. These actions bolster the US economy by deploying billions of dollars and creating good-paying jobs across the transition to cleaner technologies. This strategy will make Americans healthier and more productive, while underpinning a manufacturing resurgence in America. Since 2000, PM2.5 concentrations in the outdoor air have decreased by 42% while the US Gross Domestic Product increased by 52% during that time.

“This final air quality standard will save lives and make all people healthier, especially within America’s most vulnerable and overburdened communities,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “Cleaner air means that our children have brighter futures, and people can live more productive and active lives, improving our ability to grow and develop as a nation. EPA looks forward to continuing our decades of success in working with states, counties, Tribes, and industry to ensure this critical health standard is implemented effectively to improve the long-term health and productivity of our nation.”

Along with strengthening the primary annual PM2.5 standard, EPA is modifying the PM2.5 monitoring network design criteria to include a factor that accounts for proximity of populations at increased risk of PM2.5-related health effects to sources of air pollution. This will advance environmental justice by ensuring localized data collection in overburdened areas to inform future NAAQS reviews.

Particle pollution is of great concern to those with heart or lung disease and other vulnerable communities, including children, older adults, and people with health conditions like asthma, as well as already overburdened communities, including many communities of color and low-income communities throughout the United States. Strengthening the Clean Air Act standard for fine particle pollution improves air quality nationally for everyone, ensuring that communities that are overburdened by pollution are not left behind.

“The Biden administration is taking life-saving action to protect people and rein in deadly pollution,” said Abigail Dillen, President of Earthjustice. “The science is crystal clear. Soot, otherwise known as fine particle pollution, is a killer. It is driving heart disease, our asthma epidemic, and other serious illnesses. The people who suffer most are children and older Americans who live in communities of color and low-income communities. This federal standard will ensure that states respond to the ongoing public health and environmental justice crisis, saving thousands of lives and avoiding 800,000 asthma symptom cases every year.”

“Administrator Regan and President Biden deserve thanks for taking this vital step to curb soot pollution - a dangerous and even deadly pollutant that has taken an oversized toll on underrepresented and overburdened communities less equipped to deal with its severe health impacts,” said Dr. Doris Browne, 118th President of the National Medical Association. “This new standard of 9 micrograms per cubic meter will save lives based on scientific evidence. That is the bottom line. And as a physician, an advocate for clean air, and the past president of the National Medical Association representing physicians, our ultimate goal is health equity.”

“President Biden and EPA Administrator Regan’s new soot pollution limits will save thousands of lives and slash air pollution for people across the country, especially those disproportionately impacted by deadly particle pollution,” said Margie Alt, Director of the Climate Action Campaign. “This standard makes meaningful progress toward protecting our health and addressing the administration’s environmental justice commitments.”

“Particle pollution is a killer. In the United States alone, it cuts thousands of lives short, taking a staggering toll. Children’s bodies are uniquely vulnerable to the harms of soot pollution,” said Dominique Browning, Director and Co-Founder of Moms Clean Air Force.1 “Moms Clean Air Force commends EPA for taking a significant step forward in strengthening the annual standard for particle pollution, also known as soot, to 9 micrograms per cubic meter from its current level at 12. EPA’s new national health standard for particle pollution is the first improvement in over a decade. Soot is associated with increased infant mortality, hospital admissions for heart and lung diseases, cancer, and increased asthma severity. EPA’s finalized protection is an important step towards cleaner, healthier air for all children.”

“I applaud US EPA Administrator Michael Regan for today's action to reduce fine particle pollution and protect communities. These standards will build upon the significant progress already made in improving air quality throughout New York and help prevent the many serious health effects plaguing our most at-risk populations,” said New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Commissioner Basil Seggos. “Last year, historic smoke plumes from wildfires across Canada increased New Yorkers’ awareness of how fine particulate pollution from natural and man-made sources affects the air we breathe, particularly for the most vulnerable among us.”2

In June 2021, EPA announced it would reconsider the December 2020 decision to retain the 2012 standards because the available scientific evidence and technical information indicated that the standards may not be adequate to protect public health and welfare. EPA considered the available science and technical information, as well as the recommendations of the independent advisors comprising the Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee and CASAC PM expert panel when making the decision on whether to strengthen the PM standards.

Based on the scientific evidence, technical information, recommendations from CASAC, and public comments on the 2023 proposed standards, EPA has set two primary standards for PM2.5, which work together to protect public health: the annual standard, which EPA has revised, and a 24-hour standard, which the agency retained. EPA also retained the current primary 24-hour standard for PM10, which provides protection against coarse particles. EPA is also not changing the secondary (welfare-based) standards for fine particles and coarse particles at this time.

A broad and growing body of science links particle pollution to a range of serious and sometimes deadly illnesses. Many studies show that these microscopic fine particles can penetrate deep into the lungs and that long- and short-term exposure can lead to asthma attacks, missed days of school or work, heart attacks, expensive emergency room visits and premature death.

Due to the efforts that states, Tribes, industry, communities, and EPA have already taken to reduce dangerous pollution in communities across the country, 99% of US counties are projected to meet the more protective standard in 2032, likely the earliest year that states would need to meet the revised standard. That’s even before accounting for additional actions on the horizon to implement the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation Reduction Act investments and to update source-specific emission standards.

EPA is also revising the Air Quality Index to improve public communications about the health risks from PM2.5 exposures.

Some PM is emitted directly from combustion sources, construction sites, industrial processes, and older diesel engines, while other particles are formed in the atmosphere in complex chemical reactions with other pollutants such as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides that are emitted from power plants, gasoline and diesel engines, and certain industrial processes. Particle pollution from industrial processes and other sources is controllable, with readily available and cost-effective technologies to manage emissions, and EPA will build on decades of experience in providing flexible options to states and Tribes across the implementation process.

EPA carefully considered extensive public input as it determined the final standards. The agency held a virtual public hearing and received about 700,000 written comments before finalizing today’s updated air quality standards.

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced a settlement under the Agency’s Coal Ash (Coal Combustion Residuals) program with the Greenidge Generation LLC, an electrical generating plant in Dresden, New York. This settlement, the first under EPA’s National Enforcement and Compliance Initiatives, commits Greenidge to address groundwater monitoring issues and to ensure the proper closure of a coal ash surface impoundment under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The company will also pay a fine of $105,000.

Produced primarily from the burning of coal in coal-fired power plants, coal ash, also referred to as Coal Combustion Residuals (CCR), is a large industrial waste stream by volume and can contain harmful levels of contaminants such as mercury, cadmium, arsenic, and cobalt. Prior to 2015, the management and disposal of coal ash was not regulated at the national level; instead, it was regulated to varying degrees, if at all, by some states under various programs.  Historic disposal occurred through placement in unlined surface impoundments and landfills.  Without proper containment and management, contaminants from coal ash can pollute waterways, groundwater, drinking water, and the air.

“Coal ash contamination wreaks havoc on the environment and drinking water systems, particularly in overburdened communities,” said David M. Uhlmann, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “EPA is committed to ensuring that coal ash surface impoundments and landfills operate and close in a manner that protects public health and the environment. This settlement is an important step forward in the federal government’s nationwide effort to ensure coal burning plants clean up the harmful effects of the toxic waste they produce.”

“EPA is working to ensure that companies comply with environmental regulations designed to protect public health, our lands and water resources,” said EPA Region 2 Regional Administrator Lisa F. Garcia. “This settlement requires Greenidge to cease using, and close, its surface impoundment and to monitor groundwater at the facility to protect surrounding communities and determine whether further steps are required.”

Greenidge burns natural gas to generate electricity for its bitcoin mining operation, and also provides energy to the state’s electricity grid.

EPA alleges that Greenidge did not meet certain requirements under the coal ash program, including:

Failure to comply with certain groundwater monitoring system requirements.
Failure to adequately prepare annual groundwater monitoring and corrective action reports.
Failure to timely prepare initial closure and post closure plans for its coal ash impoundment.
The settlement requires Greenidge to assess groundwater contamination from the coal ash impoundment at its facility. Greenidge will conduct groundwater sampling and analysis, evaluate groundwater flow to determine if additional wells are needed, and update and implement a closure plan for the coal ash impoundment. Ultimately, if groundwater monitoring reveals contamination above the federal groundwater protection standards, Greenidge will be required by self-implementing regulation to design and implement a corrective action program to address the contamination.

To address the risks from disposal and discharge of coal ash, including leaking of contaminants into groundwater, blowing of contaminants into the air as dust, and the catastrophic failure of coal ash surface impoundments, in April 2015, EPA established national rules for coal ash management and disposal.  These rules establish a comprehensive set of requirements for the safe handling and disposal of coal ash from coal-fired power plants, which established technical requirements for coal ash landfills and surface impoundments.

EPA is increasing its efforts and working with its state partners to investigate compliance concerns at coal ash facilities around the nation to ensure compliance and protect the health of communities overburdened by pollution such as coal ash residuals.

Today, The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Justice Department and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts announced a settlement agreement with the City of Lowell, Massachusetts, requiring the city to reduce sewage discharges into the Merrimack River. Under the consent decree, Lowell will pay a $200,000 penalty for past violations.

A portion of Lowell’s wastewater collection system consists of sewers that convey sanitary sewage and stormwater runoff in a single pipe.  During wet weather, untreated combined sewage is discharged through combined sewer overflow (CSO) outfalls to the Merrimack River and its tributaries, including Beaver Brook and the Concord River. The Merrimack River is a drinking water source for several downstream communities. Today’s settlement requires work to separate wastewater and stormwater, which will minimize the number of times untreated sewage is released into nearby waters.

Lowell will also implement a program to detect and eliminate illicit connections that discharge wastewater to the city’s stormwater system thereby reducing pollution in stormwater that flows into local streams and rivers. Lowell must also establish and implement city ordinances to help prevent stormwater runoff from construction and post construction sites.

The total cost to update the sewer system has been estimated at approximately $195 million.

This consent decree was the result of a joint enforcement action brought by the Justice Department on behalf of the EPA, and the Massachusetts Attorney General’s Office, on behalf of the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.

“For far too long the city of Lowell, Massachusetts has failed to protect the communities that rely on the Merrimack River and other water sources for their drinking water,” said Assistant Administrator David M. Uhlmann of EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “Today’s settlement demonstrates EPA’s commitment to ensure cities and towns meet their obligations under the Clean Water Act to prevent the overflow of sewage, pollutants, and debris into our nation’s waterways.”

“Today’s settlement will result in cleaner and healthier water for the residents of Lowell and downstream communities, including some with environmental justice concerns, that rely on the Merrimack River for drinking water,” said Assistant Attorney General Todd Kim of the Justice Department’s Environment and Natural Resources Division. “The Justice Department is committed to upholding our nation’s water protection laws for the benefit all.”

“With this consent decree, the City of Lowell is taking necessary steps to further protect Lowell’s historic river ecosystem and improve the quality of the Merrimack River for its residents,” said Massachusetts Attorney General Andrea Joy Campbell.  “These measures are critical as we continue our work to ensure that all of our residents live in a healthy and safe environment.”

“This settlement is good news for Lowell and for communities downstream who will be better able to enjoy healthful activities on and near the Merrimack River. The Merrimack flows through several historically disadvantaged communities, so this settlement is especially important for ensuring that all citizens can enjoy a clean and healthy environment,” said EPA New England Regional Administrator David W. Cash. “EPA is committed to continuing our work to ensure that Massachusetts and New Hampshire citizens along the Merrimack River have clean and safe water. The timing of this is fortunate, as funding assistance available in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law may help defray costs borne by local ratepayers.”

“We are proud to have worked alongside our colleagues at the Attorney General’s Office and with our federal partners to make significant progress toward reducing contamination in the Merrimack River,” said Commissioner Bonnie Heiple of the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. “The Healey-Driscoll Administration is committed to addressing complex issues like combined sewer overflows head-on, using all available tools – including technical support, funding, and enforcement – to promote better environmental and public health outcomes.”

This settlement is part of EPA’s continuing efforts to keep raw sewage and contaminated stormwater out of our nation’s waters. Raw sewage overflows and inadequately controlled stormwater discharges from municipal sewer systems introduce a variety of harmful pollutants, including disease causing organisms, metals and nutrients that threaten our communities’ water quality and can contribute to disease outbreaks, beach and shellfish bed closings, flooding, stream scouring, fishing advisories and basement backups of sewage.

Lowell owns and, through the Lowell Regional Wastewater Utility, operates the Duck Island Clean Water Facility, a 32 million gallon per day secondary wastewater treatment facility that discharges to the Merrimack River. The treatment facility treats wastewater not only from Lowell but also from the Towns of Chelmsford, Dracut, Tewksbury and Tyngsboro, Massachusetts.

Today, Guam Waterworks Authority (GWA) agreed to a consent decree with the United States to improve the quality of its sewer system, estimated to cost approximately $400 million, to address unauthorized overflows of untreated sewage and other violations of the Clean Water Act. The Government of Guam is also a party to the agreement.

The United States filed a complaint alleging that GWA was in violation of provisions of the Clean Water Act and applicable permits by repeatedly discharging untreated sewage from its wastewater collection system and discharging excess pollutants from its wastewater treatment plants. At least 237 sanitary sewer overflows have occurred from GWA’s collection system since 2018. GWA has also been implementing Safe Drinking Water Act work and other Clean Water Act work under a 2011 federal court order.

“Sewer overflows can cause significant health and environmental problems in communities, which is why today’s settlement with Guam Water Authority is so essential,” said David M. Uhlmann, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “By improving sewer system operations and updating infrastructure, Guam will meet its legal obligations and be better prepared for the major storms that are likely to happen more frequently due to climate change.”

“Today’s action shows our continuing commitment to prioritize enforcement and encourage environmental improvement in the communities most burdened by environmental harm,” said Assistant Attorney General Todd Kim of the Justice Department’s Environment and Natural Resources Division (ENRD). “By improving Guam’s sewer system infrastructure, GWA can encourage and support better health for people and the environment and improve their ability to meet the challenges presented by a changing climate.”

“Clean water is fundamental to public health,” said US Attorney Shawn N. Anderson for the Districts of Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands. “Guam deserves an enhanced, modern infrastructure to ensure the continuing preservation of its natural resources and the health of our communities. The benefits of this agreement will be enjoyed by generations of residents and visitors on this beautiful island.”

The consent decree requires GWA to minimize overflows, which will have immediate benefits to the island’s environment. Untreated sewage from overflows can pose serious threats to human health and damage the environment.

GWA will improve sewer system operation and maintenance programs and implement new requirements for pretreatment of wastewater and to control fats, oils and grease (FOG). Sewer system upgrades will include practices to improve climate change resiliency of pump stations and to consider EPA’s Creating Resilient Water Utilities initiative, including the Resilient Strategies Guide for Water Utilities. The settlement also requires enhanced public outreach and engagement to increase transparency around GWA’s plans to comply with the agreement and educate the public on its environmental improvements.

GWA will also develop a feasibility study for secondary treatment upgrades to the Hagåtña wastewater treatment plant, which will include analyses of climate change and sea level rise and be submitted for EPA’s approval. This secondary treatment upgrade will be embodied in a subsequent judicial settlement. GWA receives some grant funding from EPA for wastewater and drinking water projects, including $50 million in Bipartisan Infrastructure Law funding over the past two years.

Reducing overflows will also protect coral reef ecosystems from adverse nutrient imbalances and coral diseases that can result from sewage discharges. The environmental impacts of sewage spills to waters include hypoxia, harmful algal blooms, habitat degradation, floating debris and impacts to sensitive species.

Today, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Justice Department announced that Holly Energy Partners-Operating L.P. and Osage Pipe Line Company LLC have agreed to pay $7.4 million in Clean Water Act civil penalties and implement corrective measures to settle claims stemming from a pipeline rupture and crude oil spill from the Osage pipeline onto land owned by members of the Sac and Fox Nation in Oklahoma. In addition to payment of the civil penalties, the settlement requires that the two companies complete the cleanup and remediation of the impacted area and take additional steps to prepare for and prevent future spills.

“The pipeline spill in this case dumped nearly 300,000 gallons of crude oil, contaminating Skull Creek and severely hampering water quality and the aquatic environment in the creek,” said Assistant Administrator David M. Uhlmann of EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “EPA and its federal partners are requiring the oil companies who caused the spill to restore Skull Creek, operate safely, and take steps to prevent future spills.”

“Oil companies have a responsibility to prevent harmful oil spills, and today’s settlement demonstrates that those who violate this duty will be held accountable under the law,” said Assistant Attorney General Todd Kim of the Justice Department’s Environment and Natural Resources Division. “We appreciate the Sac and Fox Nation’s steady involvement in monitoring the cleanup efforts for environmental, natural resource, and cultural resource impacts and respect the Nation’s efforts to be caring stewards of lands owned by its members.”

“The Sac and Fox Nation is a strong partner in conserving and protecting the environment and natural resources. EPA worked closely with the Nation to keep its environmental staff and leadership updated during the response and cleanup of the Osage Pipeline spill,” said EPA Region 6 Administrator Dr. Earthea Nance. “Today’s settlement is an important step in holding the company accountable for the impacts to Skull Creek and other potential effects.”

“Safeguarding Oklahoma’s natural resources is of the utmost importance for future generations,” said US Attorney Robert J. Troester for the Western District of Oklahoma. “My office remains committed to furthering environmental justice by ensuring those responsible for oil spills remediate and rectify the impacts to our communities and tribal partners.”

The United States filed its Complaint today in the US District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma along with the notice of lodging of a Consent Decree to resolve the case. In the Complaint, the United States alleges that the two related Dallas-based companies are liable under the Clean Water Act for the crude oil spill that occurred on July 8, 2022. Osage Pipe Line Company owns the 135-mile-long, 20-inch-diameter pipeline that transports crude oil from a tank farm in Cushing, Oklahoma, to the HollyFrontier refinery in El Dorado, Kansas. Holly Energy Partners-Operating is the operator of the pipeline.

The Complaint alleges the spill occurred when a segment of the pipeline ruptured adjacent to Skull Creek about five miles north of Cushing. From the point of the discharge, Skull Creek flows about three more miles before entering the Cimarron River. The pipeline was operating at the time of the rupture and discharged about 300,000 gallons (7,110 barrels) of crude oil into the creek. The land where the rupture occurred, and the adjacent downstream parcel that the creek runs through, are both allotment lands owned by members of the Sac and Fox Nation.

The companies, the EPA, the Department of Transportation’s Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), the Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Indian Affairs, and the Sac and Fox Nation responded to the rupture and spill. The companies are continuing cleanup work in Skull Creek under the oversight of the EPA, and the pipeline was returned to operation at reduced pressure under the oversight of PHMSA through its corrective action authority. The Sac and Fox Nation deployed tribal monitors to observe the companies’ work at the spill site and monitor for impacts to natural and cultural resources.

In addition to payment of the civil penalties in the Consent Decree, the companies will be required to complete the cleanup and remediation of the impacted area, improve their pipeline integrity management program, provide additional training for all their control room operators, and expand their spill notification efforts for tribal governments with land interests within the footprint of the pipeline. The penalties and remedial measures required by the Consent Decree are in addition to the costs the companies have incurred to clean up the oil spill.

Section 311(b) of the Clean Water Act makes it unlawful to discharge oil or hazardous substances into or upon the navigable waters of the United States or adjoining shorelines, the contiguous zone, or in connection with activities under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act in quantities that may be harmful to the environment or public health. The penalties for this spill will be deposited in the federal Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund managed by the National Pollution Funds Center. The Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund is used to pay for federal response activities and to compensate victims for damages when there is a discharge or substantial threat of discharge of oil or hazardous substances.

Today, EPA is announcing a settlement with Open Mountain Energy, LLC, a geothermal power generation company, for the attempted illegal import of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), which is the latest in a series of enforcement actions EPA has taken recently against importers of HFCs.  HFCs are a super climate pollutant with global warming potentials hundreds to thousands of times higher than CO2.  For this reason, pursuant to the Montreal Protocol, HFCs will be almost fully phased out by developed countries by 2036.  EPA has made it a national enforcement and compliance priority to address the illegal import of HFCs under the current phasedown and has settled five cases over the last several months with companies regarding HFC imports.

“Climate change continues to accelerate, which makes addressing super climate pollutants like HFCs a key part of EPA’s strategy to limit global climate change to 1.5 degrees Celsius,” said Assistant Administrator David M. Uhlmann for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “Our HFC enforcement efforts send a clear message to HFC importers that the federal government is vigilantly monitoring imports of HFCs and will hold illegal actors accountable.”

In EPA’s enforcement case with Open Mountain Energy, LLC, EPA prevented 44,092 pounds, or approximately 20 metric tons, of illegal hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) from being imported into the US  If released into the atmosphere, these HFCs are the equivalent of 20,600 metric tons of CO2, or the same amount of CO2 produced from powering 4,008 homes with electricity produced from coal for a year. Under the terms of the settlement, the company will pay a penalty of $41,566.

In a second case, EPA took enforcement action through its HFC Expedited Settlement Agreement Pilot Program. Earlier last month, EPA finalized its first Expedited Settlement Agreement with Sigma Air, LLC, for the attempted illegal import of 3,736 pounds of R-410A, a blend of different HFCs. The company will remain on EPA’s watch list for repeat offenses. This pilot program can be used to quickly address smaller quantities of illegally imported HFCs, with an appropriate penalty to assure would be violators are adequately punished and deterred.

Achieving the goals of the HFC phasedown also requires accurate data. In addition to preventing illegal imports of HFCs, EPA is also using its enforcement authorities to target HFC importers that failed to accurately report their import quantities to EPA. Three recent settlements show how EPA enforcement actions are helping ensure accurate data, essential for setting sound climate change policy, such as setting baseline and targets for the HFC Phasedown rule. The combined penalties paid in these cases against Combs Investment Property, LP; Waysmos USA, Inc.; and Nature Gas Import and Export Inc., exceed $500,000. EPA will continue to scrutinize the reporting data to ensure the Agency and the public have the best data available to make informed decisions on fighting climate change.

The Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol, adopted by the United Nations in 2016, requires the global phasedown of HFCs by 2036 for the United States and other developed countries. 1

In response to the Kigali Amendment, Congress passed the bipartisan American Innovation and Manufacturing Act of 2020 (AIM Act), requiring the United States to phase down HFC production and consumption by 85% by 2036. Over the past year, EPA and CBP denied entry to approximately 25 shipments of illegal HFCs. Under EPA’s HFC phasedown regulations, importers must expend allowances to import HFCs. Illegal imports of HFCs undermine the phasedown, disadvantage companies who follow the rules, and contribute to global warming.

The leaders of the US Environmental Protection Agency, US Department of Housing and Urban Development and US Department of Energy announced a joint letter asking for the nation’s leading utility companies to make energy and water use data freely available to the owners of multifamily properties to eliminate barriers to energy efficiency improvements for families who live in multifamily assisted housing.

“Under President Biden’s leadership, we’re seeing a historic transition to clean energy across the entire economy. Thanks to leaders like Secretary Fudge and Secretary Granholm, this transition includes our nation’s housing, leading to a reduction in household pollution and resulting in significant cost savings for families,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “There’s more work to be done, especially for the communities that have been left behind for far too long. This joint effort will provide improved critical energy data, creating brighter, more efficient homes, and further reducing costs, ensuring we can build a sustainable future for all.”

“Thanks to the President’s Inflation Reduction Act, we are investing billions in much-needed energy efficiency upgrades at the properties where many of our most vulnerable populations call home,” said HUD Secretary Marcia L. Fudge. “In order to do that, we need to provide the properties we serve with accurate data. Today, we join the DOE and EPA to ask utility companies to help us by making information available on energy and water usage for all.”

“Through President Biden’s Investing in America agenda, DOE’s Home Energy Rebates will help American households save nearly a billion dollars annually on their energy bills by making it easier to install upgrades like insulation or new electric Energy Star appliances,” said US Secretary of Energy Jennifer M. Granholm. “We are proud to join HUD and EPA to call for utility companies to provide accurate usage data and maximize the ability for all households – including renters – to live in more comfortable, energy efficient homes.”

Multifamily properties are home to more than 19 million low-income households – over 15 percent of all US households. Upgrades to these properties targeting utility conservation could significantly reduce energy and water costs. Under the Inflation Reduction Act, the Biden-Harris Administration delivered more than $6.6 billion in funding for US multifamily properties to improve energy and water efficiency and lower costs. This includes programs like HUD’s Green and Resilient Retrofit Program (GRRP) and DOE’s Home Efficiency Rebate Program.

To maximize the impact of these investments, owners of multifamily properties need access to complete energy use data for their buildings – data that many utility companies currently fail to share. EPA offers Guidance for Utilities on Providing Whole-Building Energy Data, as well as one-on-one support to utilities interested in making this data available to owners.

The US Environmental Protection Agency on Tuesday announced the selection of nine grant applicants to receive an expected $10.67 million in funding to enhance wildfire smoke preparedness and protection in communities throughout the West.

“After the wildfires in Maui, the wildfire smoke that blanketed the East Coast last summer, and the many devastating wildfires in the West, we are all aware of the very real health impacts of smoke as well as the critical importance of smoke preparedness,” said EPA Deputy Administrator Janet McCabe. “EPA is providing more than $10 million in grant funding that will help provide important public health protections in communities across our country, especially in those communities who have been overburdened by smoke pollution for far too long.”

“As climate chaos intensifies, so do extreme wildfires and hazardous smoke events — events that endanger public health and impact everyday life for those under the plumes of dark smoke,” said Senator Jeff Merkley, Chair of the Interior Appropriations Subcommittee. “I created this program to help ensure communities in Oregon and across the West have access to the resources they need to protect themselves from the dangerous smoke and heat that has unfortunately become expected with our increasingly hot summer months.”

“I’m excited to see the US Environmental Protection Agency taking critical steps to bolster wildfire smoke preparedness and protection in communities throughout the West,” said Congressman Joe Neguse, Co-Chair of the Bipartisan Wildfire Caucus. “Like all Coloradans, I’ve seen firsthand the real and growing threats associated with wildfires. This nearly $11 million investment in wildfire smoke preparedness will help states and local organizations, including the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE), implement best practices to prepare for and respond to the threat of wildfire smoke.”1

Wildfire smoke is a significant public health problem. Smoke plumes can have impacts over a large portion of the US population, with health impacts ranging from eye and throat irritation to asthma attacks, heart problems, emergency room visits, hospitalizations, and even premature death. Local officials often advise people to stay indoors during a smoke event. Some of the smoke from outdoors, however, can enter homes and buildings and make it unhealthy to breathe indoor air, too. Buildings are varied and do not all provide the same level of protection against wildfire smoke.

The Wildfire Smoke Preparedness in Community Buildings grant program is a new federal program to enhance community wildfire smoke preparedness by providing grants to states, federally recognized Tribes, public preschools, local educational agencies, and non-profit organizations. Projects are designed to assess, prevent, control, or abate wildfire smoke hazards in community buildings that serve the public, and that serve disadvantaged communities or vulnerable populations. EPA anticipates award of nine grants, ranging from approximately $350,000 to $2 million – totaling over $10 million.

The following entities have been selected for awards, which are contingent on completion of all legal and administrative requirements relating to the grant:

Arizona Board of Regents-Arizona State University, Arizona - To engage diverse communities in Arizona to develop resilient solutions to the challenges that are posed by wildfires. The project is expected to: (1) engage community members with knowledge of indoor air pollution control and associated health fields, (2) evaluate the resilient capacity of facilities to handle the air pollution and heat impacts of wildfires, and (3) implement sustainable solutions in facilities to enhance resiliency towards the air quality and heat impacts of wildfires.
Esperanza Community Housing Corporation, California - To protect the people of South Los Angeles from wildfire smoke by strengthening wildfire smoke preparedness infrastructure in the Mercado La Paloma building and using the site as the launch pad for a grassroots education and outreach campaign.
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, Colorado - To design and implement a statewide program to provide outreach, education, and training for local community partners on how to prepare for, and respond to, the public health threat of wildfire smoke.
Nez Perce Tribe, Tribal land within boundaries of Idaho - To improve public health protection against smoke from wildfires by strengthening preparedness in community buildings. The project will enhance smoke readiness planning, outreach and training, deploy portable air cleaners, conduct indoor/outdoor air monitoring, complete weatherization, and upgrade HVAC systems. Three community centers, nine public libraries, and four youth centers will be upgraded to provide cleaner air spaces to the public during wildfire smoke events for effective reduction of occupants’ exposure.
Montana Department of Public Health and Human Services, Montana - To engage a variety of partners to increase wildfire smoke awareness, create and pilot a clean air shelter recognition program in six communities for easy replication in other high need areas, create culturally appropriate and tailored messaging on wildfire smoke and air quality, and provide training to building and facility managers on HVAC maintenance and importance of good indoor air quality.
Oregon State University, Oregon - To develop a set of interventions that includes tailored toolkits and resources that can be used by schools, preschools, and daycares to reduce wildfire smoke exposures and increase community resilience across Oregon.
Utah Department of Environmental Quality, Utah - To enhance communities’ resilience to wildfire smoke by (1) deploying indoor/outdoor low-cost PM2.5 and CO2 sensors at public schools, (2) developing air quality alerts, and (3) distributing air cleaners and filters to public schools/preschools and residents in target underserved areas.
Gonzaga University, Washington - For activities that will reduce indoor exposure to pollutants in wildfire smoke in the City of Spokane and in three community centers serving disadvantaged communities.
Bellingham School District No.501, Washington - To focus on smoke readiness assessment and planning as well as indoor and outdoor air quality monitoring.


Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced a settlement agreement with Marrs Construction Co., of Bella Vista, Arkansas, addressing the company’s violations of the Lead Renovation, Repair and Painting (RRP) Rule. Under the settlement, Marrs agrees to provide information about lead safety rules on its cable TV program “Fixer to Fabulous” on the Home Garden Television (HGTV) Network and through Marrs’ social media sites. Marrs is also required to pay a $35,000 civil penalty. As detailed below, this is one of multiple cases that EPA has settled involving improper lead-based paint renovation practices demonstrated on home renovation television shows on the HGTV/Discovery network.

In 2018, Marrs performed two renovations at residential properties constructed prior to 1978 without complying with applicable RRP Rule requirements. Specifically, Marrs failed to: (1) obtain recertification before beginning renovations, (2) assign a certified renovator to each renovation, (3) maintain records showing their compliance with RRP measures, and (4) perform work in accordance with the work practice standards. Since being contacted by EPA, Marrs obtained RRP firm certification, certified its complying with the RRP Rule, and pledged to comply in all future renovation activities.

“It’s important that the public understand that any renovation, repair or painting project in a pre-1978 home can easily create dangerous lead dust or expose children to dangerous, sometimes deadly, paint chips,” said David M. Uhlmann, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “Home renovation TV programs in particular have an obligation to show the public how to renovate old homes safely and lawfully, not in a manner that is dangerous, misleading, and puts the wellbeing of children at risk.”

Lead exposure can cause irreversible and life-long health effects, including decreasing IQ, focus, and academic achievement in children. While lead is dangerous to all children, not all children are equally exposed to lead, nor do they suffer the same consequences of exposure. The harmful impacts of lead disproportionately impact environmentally overburdened, low-income families and their communities.

As part of the settlement, Marrs will help raise awareness about the EPA Lead RRP program by including educational information about compliance with the Lead RRP Rules in future episodes of “Fixer to Fabulous,” one episode in their upcoming season five and two episodes in season six. The company has also agreed to produce and post on their social media sites a 30-second video public service announcement that focuses on EPA lead safety measures. The company will also make it available to EPA for future use.

EPA has designated the reduction of childhood lead exposures as a high priority. The action announced today supports the agency’s continuing commitment to implement the Federal Action Plan to Reduce Childhood Lead Exposures and Associated Health Impacts.

EPA has settled several other RRP enforcement cases with programs that air on HGTV/Discovery, the same network that airs Fixer to Fabulous, including Maine Cabin Masters, Two Chicks and a Hammer, Magnolia Homes, Texas Flip N Move, and Rehab Addict and Bargain Mansions.

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Justice Department today announced that Swinerton Builders has agreed to pay a $2.3 million penalty – divided between the United States, Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM) and State of Illinois – to resolve allegations that it violated the Clean Water Act and related state laws during the construction of solar farms in Alabama, Idaho and Illinois.

The company has also agreed to undertake mitigation actions to help restore the Portneuf River in Idaho and to purchase stream credits to improve the watershed surrounding the Alabama site. The states of Alabama and Illinois joined the United States in the settlement.

“Illegal stormwater discharges from construction projects can contaminate municipal drinking water systems and harm aquatic life, which is why EPA, DOJ, and our state partners worked together to hold Swinerton Builders accountable for the company’s violations of the Clean Water Act,” said David M. Uhlmann, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “Solar farms are vital to slowing the effects of climate change, but companies building solar farms must comply with environmental protection requirements just as companies must do for any other construction project.”

“This settlement holds Swinerton accountable for its widespread Clean Water Act violations and ensures that nearby communities in Alabama and Idaho will benefit from projects to restore the waterways and enhance recreation,” said Assistant Attorney General Todd Kim of the Justice Department’s Environment and Natural Resources Division (ENRD). “We’re grateful for the work and cooperation of our state partners in helping reach this agreement.”

“My office was pleased to work with the United States Department of Justice to resolve the alleged water pollution violations,” said Illinois Attorney General Kwame Raoul. “Clean water is a critical resource, and I will continue the work to protect Illinois water sources.”

“We are pleased with today’s announced settlement, which holds the builder to task for serious stormwater violations that harmed the watershed and its ecosystem,” said ADEM Director Lance LeFleur. “The settlement not only requires Swinerton to pay civil penalties to both the state and federal government, it also obligates the company to mitigate the environmental damage it caused by taking steps to protect water quality and preserve habitats through the purchase of stream credits. Those credits are an investment that will provide long-term benefits to the watershed.”

Background

Swinerton is a California-based construction company that operates nationwide. Until 2021, its Swinerton Renewable Energy division was the country’s leading constructor of utility-scale solar farms.

Solar farm construction involves clearing and grading large sections of land, which can lead to significant erosion and major runoff of sediment into waterways if stormwater controls at the site are inadequate. Increased sediment in waterways can injure, suffocate or kill aquatic life, damage aquatic ecosystems and cause significant harm to drinking water treatment systems. To avoid these harms to the environment and public health, parties responsible for construction of solar farms must obtain construction stormwater permits under the Clean Water Act and comply with the terms of those permits. A complaint filed with the settlement alleges that during its construction of solar farms near American Falls, Idaho, Lafayette, Alabama, and Perry and White Counties, Illinois, Swinerton failed to use proper stormwater controls, did not conduct regular site inspections by qualified personnel and did not accurately report and address stormwater issues. At the Alabama and Idaho sites, Swinerton’s actions led to unauthorized discharges of large volumes of sediment-laden stormwater into nearby waterways. The United States previously settled cases against the owners of the four solar farm sites.

Settlement Details

To resolve the alleged Clean Water Act violations at these sites, Swinerton will pay a civil penalty of $1,614,600 to the United States, $540,500 to ADEM and $144,900 to the State of Illinois. In addition, Swinerton will fund substantial mitigation projects to redress the excess sediment discharges at the Idaho and Alabama sites. In Idaho, Swinerton will provide $600,000 in funding towards a restoration project on the Portneuf River in nearby Pocatello. The project will capture sediment, reconnect riparian and wetland habitat, and will provide a host of other environmental and recreational benefits. In Alabama, Swinerton will purchase 14,020 stream credits in the surrounding watershed, which will help preserve the watershed to promote healthier water quality and aquatic habitats.

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced a proposed rule to tackle wasteful methane emissions from the oil and gas sector, delivering on Congress’ directive in the Inflation Reduction Act to incentivize adoption of industry best practices that reduce pollution.  The proposed rule will assess a charge on certain large emitters of waste methane from the oil and gas sector that exceed emissions intensity levels set by Congress. Working in tandem with unprecedented funding secured by President Biden under the Inflation Reduction Act and recently finalized technology standards for the industry issued in December 2023, the proposed Waste Emissions Charge encourages the early deployment of available technologies and best practices to reduce methane emissions and other harmful air pollutants before the new standards take effect.

“Under President Biden’s leadership, EPA is delivering on a comprehensive strategy to reduce wasteful methane emissions that endanger communities and fuel the climate crisis,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “Today’s proposal, when finalized, will support a complementary set of technology standards and historic resources from the Inflation Reduction Act, to incentivize industry innovation and prompt action. We are laser-focused on working collectively with companies, states, and communities to ensure that America leads in deploying technologies and innovations that aid in the development of a clean energy economy.”

“I’m pleased to see the Biden Administration move forward with this critical program to slow climate change and protect our one and only planet,” said Senator Carper, Chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee. “We know methane is over 80 times more potent than carbon dioxide at trapping heat in our atmosphere in the short term. Thankfully, the Methane Emissions Reduction Program – which Congress adopted as part of the Inflation Reduction Act – will incentivize producers to cut wasteful and excessive methane emissions during oil and gas production.”

“For too long it has been cheaper for oil and gas operators to waste methane rather than make the necessary upgrades to prevent leaks and flaring. Wasted methane never makes its way to consumers, but they are nevertheless stuck with the bill,” said Rep. Frank Pallone, Jr., Ranking Member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. “The Methane Emissions Reduction Program and the proposed Waste Emissions Charge will ensure consumers no longer pay for wasted energy or the harm its emissions can cause. I commend EPA for taking the next step to hold the largest polluters accountable and protect American families from dangerous methane pollution.”

“EPA’s proposal for a fee on oil and gas methane pollution implements the clean air protections for Americans that were part of the Inflation Reduction Act,” said Fred Krupp, President of the Environmental Defense Fund. “It’s common sense to hold oil and gas companies accountable for this pollution. Proven solutions to cut oil and gas methane and to avoid the fee are being used by leading companies in states across the country.”

Methane is a climate “super pollutant” that is more potent than carbon dioxide and responsible for approximately one third of the warming from greenhouse gases occurring today. The oil and natural gas sector is the largest industrial source of methane emissions in the United States. Quick reduction of these methane emissions is one of the most important and cost-effective actions the United States can take in the short term to slow the rate of rapidly rising global temperatures.

EPA issued a final rule in December 2023 to sharply reduce methane emissions and other harmful air pollution from new and existing oil and gas operations.  In addition, EPA is working to implement the three-part framework of the Inflation Reduction Act’s Methane Emissions Reduction Program.

First, EPA is partnering with the US Department of Energy (DOE) to utilize resources provided by Congress in the Inflation Reduction Act to provide over $1 billion dollars in financial and technical assistance to accelerate the transition to no- and low- emitting oil and gas technologies, including funds for activities associated with low-producing conventional wells, support for methane monitoring, and funding to help reduce methane emissions from oil and gas operations.

Second, EPA is working with industry and other stakeholders to improve the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program and increase the accuracy of reported methane emissions.

Third, with today’s proposal, EPA seeks to encourage facilities with high methane emissions to meet or exceed the levels of performance set by Congress – performance that is already being achieved by leading oil and gas companies. The Inflation Reduction Act established a Waste Emissions Charge for methane from certain oil and gas facilities that report emissions of more than 25,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per year to the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program.  As directed by Congress, the Waste Emissions Charge starts at $900 per metric ton of wasteful emissions in 2024, increasing to $1,200 for 2025, and $1,500 for 2026 and beyond, and only applies to emissions that exceed the statutorily specified levels.

EPA’s proposed rule addresses details regarding how the charge will be implemented, including the calculation of the charge and how exemptions from the charge will be applied. Facilities in compliance with the recently finalized Clean Air Act standards for oil and gas operations would be exempt from the charge after certain criteria set by Congress are met. The agency expects that over time, fewer facilities will face the charge as they reduce their emissions and become eligible for this regulatory compliance exemption.

In the meantime, the Waste Emissions Charge will help encourage the oil and gas industry to stay on target to lower emissions. Oil and natural gas operations with methane emissions in excess of the emissions intensity levels established in the Inflation Reduction Act can reduce or eliminate any charge by deploying readily available technologies to reduce harmful and wasteful emissions. This program will help to level the playing field for industry leaders already employing best practices and drive near-term opportunities for more widespread methane reductions while EPA and states work toward full implementation of the Clean Air Act standards.

Together, EPA’s Clean Air Act rule and the three Inflation Reduction Act provisions will advance the adoption of clean, cost-effective technologies, reduce wasteful practices, and yield significant economic and environmental benefits, while driving continued innovation in methane detection, monitoring, and mitigation techniques.

The US Environmental Protection Agency on Thursday announced the availability of up to $32 million to address indoor air pollution in schools as part of President Biden’s Investing in America agenda. The funding opportunity, which is made possible by President Biden’s Inflation Reduction Act and available through EPA’s Grant Funding to Address Indoor Air Pollution at Schools Program, will protect children’s health by providing resources to organizations that help K-12 schools in low-income, disadvantaged, and Tribal communities develop and adopt comprehensive indoor air quality management plans to reduce indoor air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions in schools.

“Every student should be able to learn and thrive in a healthy school environment,” said EPA Deputy Administrator Janet McCabe. “Through President Biden’s historic investment in America, EPA is working with our partners to equip schools in overburdened communities with resources to develop and implement plans that improve air quality and energy efficiency, ensuring that students and staff are breathing cleaner and healthier air in school every day.”

"Thanks to this critical EPA funding, made possible by Democrats' Inflation Reduction Act, schools across the country will now be able to improve air quality for our students,” said House Minority Whip Katherine Clark. “Currently, too many kids do not have access to clean air, and this funding will enhance their overall health and academic performance. This is what Democrats’ agenda is all about – giving communities the resources they need to ensure every child has a great future.”

“At a time when their lungs are still developing, children exposed to unsafe air can develop lifelong health problems, including serious respiratory illnesses,” said Congressman Paul Tonko (NY-20), Ranking Member of the House Energy and Commerce Environment, Manufacturing, and Critical Materials Subcommittee. “That is why we prioritized funding to address air pollution in our schools in the Inflation Reduction Act. I’m thrilled that EPA is taking vital steps through this announcement that will build upon their decades of work to help schools across the country develop strategies to ensure that as children attend school, learn, and grow, they are breathing clean, healthy air.”

Air pollution has been linked to asthma and other conditions that harm students’ health and can cause them to miss school or reduce normal activities. Children face risks from indoor air pollutants like radon, asbestos, mold, methane, and pollution, such as particulate matter from vehicle exhaust, that gets into classrooms from the outdoors. There are also serious risks to children from greenhouse gas pollution, like more frequent exposure to heat waves and wildfire smoke. Helping schools to develop comprehensive plans to tackle air pollution will help prevent respiratory illnesses in children and staff working in schools, while improving student attendance, performance, and comfort, particularly for vulnerable students with asthma.

This program advances President Biden’s Justice40 Initiative, which aims to deliver 40% of the overall benefits of certain federal investments to disadvantaged communities that are marginalized by underinvestment and overburdened by pollution.

The Grant Funding to Address Indoor Air Pollution at Schools Program

EPA anticipates awarding four to six grants of $5 million to $8 million to support five years of school indoor air quality and energy efficiency activities. Eligible projects to benefit schools include indoor air quality and greenhouse gas reduction capacity building, training and education campaigns, and research and demonstration projects.

Nonprofit organizations, state governments, and other eligible entities with experience administering national, regional, or multi-state indoor air quality programs that have achieved positive impacts in communities (especially with schools and Tribal entities) are encouraged to apply. The deadline to apply for the competitive grants is March 19, 2024. EPA estimates that the grants will be awarded by fall 2024.

For more information on this funding opportunity, including details on informational webinars, visit the Grant Funding to Address Indoor Air Pollution at Schools webpage.

Background

EPA studies of human exposure to air pollutants indicate that indoor levels of pollutants may be two to five times — and occasionally more than 100 times — higher than outdoor levels. Often, indoor air quality is poor because indoor sources of air pollution, like asbestos, radon, mold, methane, and particulates, are not controlled and the pollutant levels can become concentrated without adequate ventilation of fresh outdoor air. These levels of indoor air pollutants are of concern because most people spend about 90 percent of their time indoors. Indoor pollution in schools is a particular concern because children’s developing bodies breathe more air in proportion to their body weight than adults.

Indoor air problems can increase long- and short-term health effects for students and staff, increase absenteeism, reduce academic performance, and shorten the lifespan and effectiveness of facility systems and equipment. Examples of the health effects of indoor air pollution include coughing, respiratory diseases, allergic reactions, cancer and aggravated asthma.

In addition to indoor air problems that children face at schools, EPA and the broader scientific community have also identified significant risks to children’s health and the environment from climate change. These risks include exposure to extreme heat, worsened air quality, wildfire smoke, and other climate impacts, in school, the playground, and beyond. Implementing energy efficiency measures while simultaneously improving indoor air quality in schools can help mitigate climate and reduce pollution while providing long-term savings for schools through lower energy consumption.

The US Environmental Protection Agency on Thursday announced a proposal to strengthen Clean Air Act standards for large facilities that burn municipal solid waste. If finalized, the updated standards would reduce emissions of nine pollutants, including smog- and soot-forming sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, by approximately 14,000 tons per year, improving air quality for overburdened communities living near these facilities. These proposed standards reflect current technologies available to control pollution in a cost-effective fashion.

“President Biden believes every person deserves clean air to breathe and the opportunity to lead a healthy life, and EPA’s proposal is just the latest action to achieve this vision. By reducing harmful pollution and improving air quality, this rule will also advance environmental justice for nearby communities already overburdened with pollution,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “EPA is committed to working with communities and state, local, and Tribal governments to ensure that large facilities burning municipal waste utilize the most up-to-date and cost-effective control technologies to reduce pollution and protect public health.”

The proposed standards would apply to 57 facilities with 152 units that have the capacity to combust more than 250 tons per day of municipal solid waste. Nearly 4 million Americans live within 3 miles of these large facilities, which are disproportionately located in low-income communities and communities of color. Today’s proposal supports the Biden-Harris Administration’s unprecedented and ongoing efforts to protect overburdened communities from harmful pollution, and is likely to reduce existing disproportionate and adverse effects on communities with environmental justice concerns. The proposed standards are based on emission levels achieved by the best controlled and lower-emitting sources, and limit emissions of nine pollutants: particulate matter, sulfur dioxide, hydrogen chloride, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, lead, cadmium, mercury, and dioxins/furans.

The Clean Air Act requires EPA to evaluate these standards every five years in order to take into account developments in pollution control technologies and techniques. EPA last revised these standards in 2006. From day one, the Biden-Harris Administration has made advancing environmental justice a top priority, including by delivering on long overdue updates to pollution standards.

The estimated benefits of this action far outweigh the expected pollution control costs. After accounting for compliance costs of the rule, EPA estimated the net present value of health benefits from the proposed rule, due to reductions in particulate matter and ozone alone, to be up to $14 billion over 20 years. Reductions of mercury, lead, and other hazardous air pollutants required by the proposal are expected to result in additional unquantified economic and public health benefits. EPA believes this action is also likely to advance environmental justice by reducing existing disproportionate and adverse effects on overburdened communities.

EPA will accept comment on the proposal for 60 days after publication in the Federal Register. EPA will hold an informational webinar and will announce details on our website shortly.

Today, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced a settlement with the Navajo Tribal Utility Authority (NTUA) to improve wastewater treatment at its Chinle, Kayenta, and Tuba City facilities in Arizona. NTUA has agreed to a Partial Consent Decree that requires wastewater treatment upgrades that will total approximately $100 million and aims to improve compliance with the facilities’ Clean Water Act permits. These upgrades will impact approximately 20,000 individuals across four communities within Navajo Nation.

Based on findings from EPA inspections and reports submitted by NTUA, the US states in their complaint that NTUA violated its Clean Water Act permits by regularly discharging wastewater that had not been treated to the required permit standards, and by failing to properly operate and maintain the facilities’ sewer systems to prevent sewage spills.

The Partial Consent Decree requires NTUA to improve the performance of its existing treatment plants in the short term, and to construct new treatment plants over the longer term. NTUA will seek to relocate the new Tuba City facility from its current footprint to mitigate risks associated with the Moenkopi Wash’s continued erosion towards the facility and to decrease the chance of a catastrophic release of sewage. In addition, NTUA must improve its operation and maintenance of the facilities and study its sewer system piping to identify all defects and plan for their repair. The US and NTUA will negotiate the terms of the sewer system repair plan at a later date, and any agreement will be captured in a subsequent, Final Consent Decree. Today’s settlement also aims to ensure the affected communities have a voice in the improvement process by requiring NTUA to seek public comments on various aspects of its work plans.

“The Navajo Tribal Utility Authority unlawfully discharged untreated sewage from three of its wastewater facilities,” said David M. Uhlmann, EPA Assistant Administrator for the Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “This partial settlement will result in cleaner and healthier water for tribal communities within the Navajo Nation. They deserve nothing less.”

“Today’s action shows our commitment to prioritize public health and environmental protection for communities throughout the nation, including members of tribal communities often disproportionately burdened by pollution,” said Amy Miller, EPA’s Enforcement and Compliance Assurance Division Director for the country’s Pacific Southwest region. “By partnering with tribal governments to enforce federal and tribal pollution laws, we can protect public health and ensure communities have access to clean waterways.”

Improving the quality of water NTUA discharges from its facilities and minimizing sewage spills will directly benefit the environment and protect public health. Excess pollutants in treated wastewater can harm fish and other aquatic life, create algal blooms, and prevent surrounding communities from safely using the water. Similarly, spills and overflows from sewer pipes can pose a public health risk by potentially exposing people to untreated sewage, which may contain viruses, bacteria, or parasites that can make people ill.

To support its wastewater treatment programs, NTUA receives grant funding from various federal agencies—including the EPA, the Indian Health Service, and the Department of Agriculture—and from recent federal appropriations including the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the American Rescue Plan Act. Federal grants from these and other sources are projected to cover the majority of the $100 million cost expected under the Partial Consent Decree.

This matter is being handled by the US Department of Justice, in conjunction with the EPA. 1

The proposed decree is lodged in the US District Court of Arizona. The settlement is subject to a public comment period and final court approval. The Partial Consent Decree will be available for viewing on the Justice Department’s website at: www.justice.gov/enrd/consent-decrees.

Learn more about EPA enforcement requirements and wastewater management under the Clean Water Act on EPA’s Water Enforcement webpage.

For more information on reporting possible violations of environmental laws and regulations, visit EPA’s enforcement reporting website.

The Justice Department, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), California Air Resources Board (CARB) and the California Attorney General’s office today released the details of a proposed settlement with diesel engine maker Cummins Inc. for alleged violations of the Clean Air Act and California law. Beyond agreeing to pay a $1.675 billion civil penalty – the largest ever assessed in a Clean Air Act case – Cummins has agreed to spend more than $325 million to remedy the violations, which included the use of software “defeat devices” that circumvented emissions testing and certification requirements.

Under the settlement, Cummins must complete a nationwide vehicle recall to repair and replace the engine control software in hundreds of thousands of RAM 2500 and RAM 3500 pickup trucks equipped with the company’s diesel engines. Cummins will also extend the warranty period for certain parts in the repaired vehicles, fund and perform projects to mitigate excess ozone-creating nitrogen oxides (NOx) emitted from the vehicles and employ new internal procedures designed to prevent future emissions cheating. In total, the settlement is valued at more than $2 billion.

NOx pollution contributes to the formation of harmful smog and fine particulate matter in air.  Children, older adults, people who are active outdoors, and people with heart or lung diseases are particularly at risk for health effects related to smog or particulate matter exposure.  Nitrogen dioxide formed by NOx emissions can aggravate respiratory diseases, particularly asthma, and may also contribute to asthma development in children.

“Today’s landmark settlement is another example of the Biden-Harris administration working to ensure communities across the United States, especially those that have long been overburdened by pollution, are breathing cleaner air,” said EPA Administrator Michael Regan. “Today we’ve reaffirmed that EPA’s enforcement program will hold companies accountable for cheating to evade laws that protect public health.”

“The Justice Department is committed to vigorously enforcing environmental laws that protect the American people from harmful pollutants,” said Attorney General Merrick B. Garland.  “The types of devices we allege that Cummins installed in its engines to cheat federal environmental laws have a significant and harmful impact on people’s health and safety. This historic agreement makes clear that the Justice Department will be aggressive in its efforts to hold accountable those who seek to profit at the expense of people’s health and safety.”

“Cummins installed illegal defeat devices on more than 600,000 RAM pickup trucks, which exposed overburdened communities across America to harmful air pollution,” said David M. Uhlmann, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “This record-breaking Clean Air Act penalty demonstrates that EPA is committed to holding polluters accountable and ensuring that companies pay a steep price when they break the law.”

“Today’s agreement, which includes the largest-ever Clean Air Act civil penalty, stands as notice to manufacturers that they must comply with our nation’s laws, which protect human health and the health of our environment,” said Assistant Attorney General Todd Kim of the Justice Department’s Environment and Natural Resources Division. “We appreciate the work of our partners, the EPA and the State of California, in helping us reach this significant settlement.”

“Cummins knowingly harmed people’s health and our environment when they skirted state emissions tests and requirements,” said California Attorney General Rob Bonta. “Today’s settlement sends a clear message: If you break the law, we will hold you accountable. I want to thank our federal and state partners for their collective work on this settlement that will safeguard public health and protect consumers across the country.”

“The collaboration between California and its federal partners makes it clear that companies will be held accountable for violating essential environmental laws that are in place to provide the clean air that communities across California and the nation want and deserve,” said CARB Executive Officer Dr. Steven Cliff. “California’s air quality regulations protect public health and are backed by a world-class emissions testing laboratory that ensures CARB's enforcement efforts are rigorously supported with data and science, which CARB was pleased to contribute to this landmark case.”

Background

As in prior cases against other manufacturers, EPA discovered defeat devices in Cummins engines used in RAM pickup trucks through testing at the agency’s National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory. That testing of RAM trucks was done as follow-up on a 2015 EPA warning to manufacturers that the agency planned to conduct special testing to identify defeat devices using driving cycles and conditions that were non-standard, but still reflected normal vehicle operation and use.

The terms of the proposed settlement with Cummins are spelled out in two consent decrees that the United States and California filed today with the US District Court for the District of Columbia. In a related set of complaints filed today, the United States and California allege that nearly a million model year 2013-2023 RAM 2500 and RAM 3500 pickup trucks with Cummins diesel engines utilized undisclosed engine control software features, and more than 630,000 of those trucks made in model years 2013-2019 had illegal emissions control software defeat device features. Those software defeat devices helped the trucks pass standard EPA emissions tests, but they artificially reduced the effectiveness of the emission controls – and increased NOx emissions – during normal driving outside of the standard test conditions.

Recall and Repair Program

Cummins sought all EPA and CARB emission certifications for the RAM trucks equipped with its engines, even though the trucks were sold by the RAM truck division of Fiat Chrysler and its dealers. The settlement requires Cummins to work with Fiat Chrysler and its dealers on a vehicle recall and repair program that will remove all defeat devices from the affected 2013-2019 RAM trucks free of charge and bring the vehicles into compliance with applicable emissions standards under the Clean Air Act.  The repair only involves software updates. Cummins has already started the recall and repair program required by the settlement.

Cummins must repair at least 85% of the 2013-2019 RAM trucks equipped with defeat devices within three years. The company must offer a special extended warranty covering emission control system parts on 2013-2019 RAM trucks that receive the replacement software.  Cummins also must test some of the repaired trucks over a number of years to ensure that the trucks continue to meet emissions standards over time.

Mitigation Programs

As another requirement of the settlement, Cummins must fully offset the excess NOx emissions from the 2013-2019 RAM trucks that were equipped with defeat devices. For California, Cummins will make a lump sum payment to CARB of slightly more than $175 million to fund mitigation actions or projects that reduce NOx emissions in California through CARB mitigation programs. For the rest of the country, Cummins will secure offsetting NOx reductions by working with railroad locomotive owners on two types of locomotive emission reduction projects. First, Cummins will finance and ensure the replacement of 27 old, high-emitting diesel locomotive engines with new, low-emitting diesel or electric engines. Second, Cummins will fund and complete 50 projects that will reduce idling time for diesel-powered switch locomotives to reduce fuel usage and emissions of NOx, particulate matter, volatile organic compounds and carbon dioxide.

Public Information and Public Comment

This EPA website offers additional information concerning the settlement: https://www.epa.gov/enforcement/2024-cummins-inc-vehicle-emission-control-violations-settlement.

The complaints and the proposed consent decrees in the related cases filed by the Justice Department’s Environment Enforcement Section and the State of California can be viewed on the Justice Department’s website at www.justice.gov/enrd/consent-decrees. The proposed consent decree in the case filed by the United States is subject to a 30-day public comment period.

 The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has reached a settlement with Allied Waste Niagara Falls Landfill, LLC (Allied) for violating the federal Clean Air Act at its landfill in Niagara Falls, New York. Under the proposed settlement, Allied will pay a $671,000 penalty and operate a gas collection and control system to reduce the amount of harmful chemicals, primarily methane, as well as other harmful organic compounds, released into the air.

“Methane is a climate super pollutant that is 25 times more potent than carbon dioxide, and landfills are the third largest sources of methane emissions in the United States,” said David M. Uhlmann, Assistant Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. “Today’s agreement will require Allied to control its unlawful methane emissions and holds the company accountable for its violations of the Clean Air Act.”

“Thanks to EPA’s action, the company must operate controls to dramatically slash the climate damaging pollutants that they are putting into our air every day,” said Regional Administrator Lisa F. Garcia, EPA Region 2. “These pollutants also have health impacts, so cutting these pollutants not only protects the climate, it also safeguards the health of the people living near this landfill.”

Under the consent decree, in addition to the estimated elimination of 86,000 metric tons of CO2 equivalent methane emissions, the gas collection and control system that Allied will operate and the operational changes it will implement also will prevent 32 metric tons of non-methane landfill gas emissions per year. Methane accounts for 12% of all US greenhouse gas emissions from human activities. Landfills are the third largest source of methane in the United States and EPA is tackling these sources as part of its National Enforcement and Compliance Initiative dedicated to Mitigating Climate Change. These pollutants form when organic waste in the landfill decomposes and creates landfill gas. As a result, there are federal regulations that curb the amount of methane that can be released. In addition to causing adverse climate effects, these pollutants, especially when released unlawfully, are known or suspected carcinogens, and also are known or suspected to cause damage to the kidneys, liver, and central nervous system.

The settlement also includes capping the vents on parts of the landfill that have been inactive, monitoring the emissions and the gas wells, applying for updated state permits including a Title V major source permit, and keeping records of its compliance activities.  The settlement resolves Clean Air Act claims alleged in a complaint filed by the Department of Justice on behalf of EPA claiming that the company failed to timely install and operate a gas collection and control system on the active and inactive cells of the landfill, which caused excess landfill gas emissions to be released to the atmosphere. The complaint also claimed that Allied failed to obtain federal and state air permits as required by law.

The proposed consent decree, lodged with the US District Court for the Western District of New York, is subject to a 30-day public comment period and final court approval.

As part of its ongoing commitment to protecting children and improving air quality, today, the US Environmental Protection Agency announced the selection of 67 applicants to receive nearly $1 billion through EPA’s first Clean School Bus Program Grants Competition. The awards, which are made possible through President Biden’s Investing in America agenda, will help selectees purchase over 2,700 clean school buses in 280 school districts serving over 7 million students across 37 states. By accelerating the transition to low- and zero-emission vehicles, these awards will improve air quality for children and their families and advance environmental justice, all while boosting the economy and creating good-paying jobs.

With today’s announcement, EPA’s Clean School Bus Program has awarded nearly $2 billion and funded approximately 5,000 electric and low-emission school buses nationwide.

“Every school day, 25 million children ride our nation’s largest form of mass transit: the school bus. The vast majority of those buses run on diesel, exposing students, teachers, and bus drivers to toxic air pollution,” said Vice President Kamala Harris. “Today, we are announcing nearly $1 billion to fund clean school buses across the nation. As part of our work to tackle the climate crisis, the historic funding we are announcing today is an investment in our children, their health, and their education. It also strengthens our economy by investing in American manufacturing and America’s workforce.”

“Today we’re once again accelerating the transition to electric and low-emission school buses in America, helping to secure a healthier future where all our children can breathe cleaner air,” said EPA Administrator Michael S. Regan. “I’ve sat next to students on their very first clean school bus ride and their excitement reflects the power of good policy. Thanks to President Biden’s historic investments in America, thousands more school buses will hit the road in school districts across the country, saving school districts money and improving air quality at the same time.”

“Thanks to the Bipartisan Infrastructure & Jobs Law, as the wheels of the new, electric school buses go round and round, carbon emissions and pollution are going to keep going down and down,” said Senator Chuck Schumer (NY). “I led the Bipartisan Infrastructure & Jobs Law to passage so communities across the country will have the federal funding needed to combat climate change, and now, for the second year in a row, this major investment sets the wheels in motion to put new electric school buses on the road, curbing carbon emissions, decreasing pollution, and improving the air quality for students and communities across America. I am proud to deliver this tremendous environmental justice investment that will carry our students to a brighter future, emissions free.”

“The Biden Administration continues to honor their commitment to the health and wellbeing of our children by investing in the transformation of our national school bus fleets with zero-emission and low-emission models,” said Congressman Tony Cárdenas (CA-29). “With nearly $1 billion in investment already made, school districts in rural and urban America have eagerly taken advantage of this program. Through this latest round of investment, even more school districts will be able to provide cleaner air for students, school staff, and for the communities they serve.”

“Since I came to Congress in 2019, I have advocated for clean school bus funding and tirelessly fought for inclusion in the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. Educators know how damaging diesel exhaust can be for students and our communities. The nearly $1 billion investment, announced by the Biden-Harris Administration today, will save Connecticut school districts money, create good-paying clean energy jobs and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, protecting people and the planet. It is great to see how these efforts will impact over seven million students across the nation. This is a huge win for our state and our country.” said Congresswoman Jahana Hayes (CT-05).

The Clean School Bus Program is having far-reaching effects across school districts and their surrounding communities. Air pollution from older diesel engines is linked to asthma and other conditions that harm students’ health and can cause them to miss school. Phasing out these older diesel engines, which disproportionately affect communities of color and Tribal communities, ensures cleaner air for students, bus drivers, school staff working near bus loading areas, and the communities through which the buses drive each day.

In April 2023, EPA announced the availability of at least $400 million for its 2023 Clean School Bus Grants through a Notice of Funding Opportunity. The grant application period closed in August 2023 with an outstanding response from applicants seeking to purchase electric and low-emission school buses. Given the overwhelming demand and large number of high-scoring applications, including applicants in low-income communities, EPA has nearly doubled the amount of funding that will be awarded this round to approximately $965 million. These awards follow over $875 million obligated to new buses from the Clean School Bus Program’s 2022 Rebates, which funded the replacement of 2,366 buses at 372 school districts to further improve air quality in and around schools, advance environmental justice, reduce greenhouse gas pollution fueling the climate crisis, and accelerate America’s leadership in developing the clean vehicles of the future.

After an extensive review process, the EPA Clean School Bus Program has selected the Notice of Funding Opportunity’s top tier applicants to receive this historic investment in their community. Funds are slated to support the purchase of approximately 2,700 buses, 95% of which will be electric. EPA will distribute awards to selectees in 37 states. Prioritized school districts in low-income, rural, and/or Tribal communities make up approximately 86% of the projects selected for funding. The program delivers on President Biden’s Justice40 Initiative, which aims to deliver 40% of the overall benefits of certain federal investments to disadvantaged communities that are marginalized, underserved and overburdened by pollution.

Proactive and ongoing communication with key stakeholders, like school boards and local utilities, is critical to successful bus and infrastructure deployment. To ensure the successful implementation of the selected projects funding electric buses and charging infrastructure, EPA has created a Utility Partnership Template which encourages early and robust engagement between the applicant and their utility company. Additional details can be found in the Notice of Funding Opportunity on the Clean School Bus Program website.

Grantees will work with their EPA Regional Project Officers to finalize project plans and purchase their awarded new buses and eligible infrastructure. EPA is also partnering with the Joint Office of Energy and Transportation to provide grantees with robust technical assistance to ensure effective implementation.

EPA’s $5 billion Clean School Bus Program, created by President Biden’s Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, includes both a grant program where selected applicants are awarded funds to purchase buses, and a rebate program that allows selectees to receive awards before purchasing eligible buses that replace existing school buses with clean and zero-emission models. Today’s Clean School Bus grants are the second round of selections announced for the newly created program. EPA will make more funds available for clean school buses in additional rounds of funding.

EPA is currently accepting applications for the 2023 Clean School Bus Rebate Program until January 31, 2024. EPA encourages applicants not selected for the 2023 Clean School Bus Grant Program – and those that did not apply – to participate in current and future funding rounds. Once the application period for the 2023 rebate program closes and the school districts selected are notified, school districts can proceed with purchasing new buses and eligible infrastructure. Selectees will need to submit Payment Request Forms with purchase orders demonstrating they have ordered new buses and eligible infrastructure. After the selectees submit the proper forms, they will be eligible to receive rebate funds. All selectees must submit a Utility Partnership Agreement to verify that the school district’s electric utility provider is aware of the school district’s rebate application.

To learn more about the 2023 Clean School Bus Rebate Program, applicant eligibility, selection process, and informational webinar dates for future rounds of funding, visit the Clean School Bus Program website. Questions about applying for funding may be directed to cleanschoolbus@epa.gov. Questions about Clean School Bus Program technical assistance may be directed to CleanSchoolBusTA@nrel.gov.

About the Clean School Bus Program

EPA’s Clean School Bus Program was created under President Biden’s Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and provides an unprecedented $5 billion of funding to transform the nation’s fleet of school buses. The Clean School Bus Program funds clean school buses, including electric buses, compressed natural gas, and propane buses that produce zero tailpipe emissions compared to their older diesel predecessors, with a requirement that at least half of the funding go toward zero-emitting school buses.

The Clean School Bus Program will reduce greenhouse gas emissions, save money for school districts, and produce cleaner air. Air pollution from older diesel engines, which disproportionately impact communities of color and Tribal communities, is linked to asthma and other conditions that harm students’ health and can cause them to miss school. Replacing these older diesel engines with zero- or low-emission buses will ensure cleaner air for students, bus drivers, school staff working near bus loading areas, and the communities through which the buses drive each day.

The reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from these bus replacements will also help to address the outsized role of the transportation sector in fueling the climate crisis. The program will benefit school districts as they upgrade to cost saving and fuel-efficient school bus fleets, by replacing existing buses with brand new zero-emission and clean school buses and freeing up needed resources for schools.

Each January, the US Environmental Protection Agency recognizes National Radon Action Month to protect public health. This year, the agency is highlighting the importance of home radon testing as a vital step to protect families’ health and prevent harmful impacts like lung cancer. Radon, a colorless and odorless radioactive gas, can build up inside a home if left untreated and pose serious health risks. The best way to know if radon is present in your home and to protect your health is to test for it.

“Radon is a serious public health risk. Fortunately, there are easy steps you can take to protect your family and ensure that the air you breathe at home is healthy,” said EPA Deputy Administrator Janet McCabe. “Testing for radon is easy and inexpensive and I encourage everyone to test, fix, and save a life during this year’s Radon Action Month.”

Deputy Administrator McCabe further emphasized this call to action in a video, spreading the word about the importance of radon testing. Affordable do-it-yourself radon test kits are available online and at most home improvement and hardware stores. Some states and municipalities even provide at-home radon test kits for free. You can also hire a qualified radon professional to test your home. Contact your state or Tribal radon program to learn more about radon services in your area.

Radon remains a prominent health hazard in the United States, with millions of residences exhibiting elevated levels. As the leading cause of lung cancer among non-smokers, radon accounts for approximately 21,000 lung cancer deaths annually. Despite its severity, many remain unaware of radon and its potential health implications.

If you haven’t tested your home for radon, National Radon Action Month is the perfect time to take this step to protect yourself and your loved ones. Tens of millions of homes have already been tested, and millions of homes with high radon levels have been fixed. 

EPA recommends taking action to fix your home if you discover radon levels above 4 picocuries per liter. If your home does have elevated levels of radon, a qualified professional can install a system to lower your indoor radon levels. For more guidance on how to address radon risks, see EPA’s radon website.

Test. Fix. Save a life.









